po 
aran a. 

% 'e A Ss 
Pyalty of Mc gl 
hams UW 

Central Nervous 
system 

th 

Sn EDITION 

( 

Staff Members Of Faculty Of Medicine, ASU 



CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 

MODULE 

Study Guide 

Fourth Edition 

Part 1 

By Staff Members of Faculty of Medicine 
Ain Shams University



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Table of Contents 

CHAPTER |: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM (2to 57) 
1. ANATOMY: Introduction to CNS | P:4 
2. HISTOLOGY: Histological Structure of the CNS (Neuroglia — Cerebral cortex) P:7 
3. BIOCHEMEIneSrgyT SRouYrc:es of the CNS P:16 
4. ANATOMY: Spinal cord external features P:19 
5. BIOCHEMISTRY: Biochem. of Neurotransmitters and related CNS disorders P:23 
6. PHYSIOLOGY: Processing of signals in CNS P:28 
7. ANATOMY: Cerebral hemisphere: sensory cortex P: 34 
8. BIOCHEMISTRY: Sources of Ammoniai n the Brain & urea cycle P:36 

9. BIOCHEMISTRY:A mmonia metabolism & Urea Cycle p40 
10. BIOCHEMISTRY: Hyperammonemia and Encephalopathy P:43 
11. BIOCHEMISTRY: Inborn Errors of Amino Acid Metabolism ~~ P:44 
12. BIOCHEMISTRY: Vitamin Deficiency and Metabolic Disorders P:47 
13. BIOCHEMISTRY: Dne-carbon unit and Folate Metabolism P:53 

Chapter Il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM (58 to 113) 
1. HISTOLOGY: Histological Structure of Receptors P:60 
2. PHYSIOLOGY: Sensory Receptors and Sensory Coding P: 67 
3. HISTOLOGY: Internal Structure of Spinal Cord - Gray Matter P:70 
4. ANATOMY: Anterolateral System and Pain Pathways P:75 
5. PHYSIOLOGY: Sensations Carried by the Spinothalamic Tract P:79 
6. PHYSIOLOGY: Pain and Pain control 1 | P: 84 
7. PHYSIOLOGY: Pain and Pain control 2 P: 89 
8. PHARMACOLOGY: Opioids P:95 
14. ANATOMY: Short ascending tracts & dorsal column tracts P: 103 

9. PHYSIOLOGY: Sensations Carried by the Dorsal Column Tracts P: 106 
10. PHYSIOLOGY: Somatosensory cortex P: 110 

CHAPTER ll: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
AND IMPACT OF DIFFERENT LESIONS ON MOTOR AND SENSORY 

SYSTEMS (114 to 234) 
1. ANATOMY: Cerebral Hemisphere motor cortex P117 
2. ANATOMY: Pyramidal & Extrapyramidal Tract P:119 

3. HISTOLOGY: Spinal Cord Internal Structure: White matter P:122 
4. HISTOLOGY: Stretch Receptors structure P:129 

5. PHYSIOLOGY: Muscle Stretch Reflex 1,2 P132 

6. PHYSIOLOGY: Other Reflexes P: 143 
7. PHYSIOLOGY: Motor Cortex Function P: 150



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

8. PHYSIOLOGY: Descending Motor Tracts functions P:157 
9. ANATOMY: Blood supply & lesions of spinal cord P:161 
10. PHYSIOLOGY: Sensory and Motor Disorders P:164 
11. ANATOMY: Basal Ganglia P:178 
12. PHYSIOLOGY: Basal Ganglia P:180 
13. PATHOLOGY: Neurodegenerative Diseases of the Basal Ganglia P:188 

14. PHARMACOLOGY: Parkinsonism P:190 
15. ANATOMY: Cerebellum P:195 

16. HISTOLOGY: Cerebellum P:199 
17. PHYSIOLOGY: Cerebellum P:202 

18. PATHOLOGY: Cerebellar tumors P:211 
19. Neurology: Clinical applications on motor & sensory lesions 214 

CHAPTER IV: BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION, AND 
PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA (235 TO 305 } 

1. ANATOMY: Brain Stem external features P:237 

2. ANATOMY: Fourth Ventricle and Reticular Formation P:240 

3. HISTOLOGY: Brainstem — Medulla P:242 
4. HISTOLOGY: Brainstem — Pons P:250 

5. HISTOLOGY: Midbrain P:252 
6. ANATOMY: Columns of Cranial Nerve Nuclei P:262 

7. ANATOMY: Blood Supply of the Brain Stem P:266 
8. ANATOMY: Cranial Cavity P267 

9. ANATOMY: SCALP P:278 
10. ANATOMY: FACE P:282 

11. ANATOMY: Temporal and Infratemporal Fossae P:289 
12. ANATOMY: Trigeminal Nerve P 295 

13. ANATOMY: Pterygopalatine Fossa P 299 
14. ANATOMY: Autonomic Ganglia P 304 

CHAPTER V: ANATOMY OF THE NECK ( 306 TO 334) 

1. ANATOMY: Fascia of the Neck P 308 
2. ANATOMY: Triangles of the Neck P312 

3 ANATOMY: Suprahyoid muscles, cervical plexus & sympathetic chain. P 321 

4. ANATOMY: Last Four Cranial Nerves P 323



CHAPTER | OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

— 

Chapter —- | 

OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

i. 

Intended Learning Outcomes {ILOs): 

By the end of this chapter the student should be able to: 
1. Identify different components and function of the nervous system. 
2. Describe main brain fuel pathways to produce energy. 
3. Outline the consequence of brain energy metabolism impairment. 
4, Describe the structure of neuroglia, cerebral cortex, meninges and 

brain barriers. 
5, Define neurotransmitters. 
6. l{lustrate different biochemical pathways for neurotransmitter synthesis and 

degradation. 
7. Relate some clinical disorders to disruption of neurotransmitter metabolism 
8. Describe Signal processing in CNS . 

9. Describe spinal cord, spinal nerves, meninges and their applied anatomy. 
10. Describe layers of the scalp and their clinical significance. 
11. Describe blood and nerve supply of scalp. 
12. Describe muscles of the face. 
13. Describe blood supply, nerve supply and lymphatic drainage of face. 
14. Identify bones, sutures and main features of skull. 
15. Identify the poles, surfaces, borders and main sulci and gyri of cerebral 

hemispheres. 
16. Locate functional and motor cortical areas. 
17. Predict the outcome of lesions in any of these areas. 
18. Clarify amino acid metabolism and production of ammonia 
19. Describe fate of ammonia and urea cycle. 
20. Explain causes and impact of hyperammonemia. 
21. Describe the biochemical basis of different inborn errors of amino acid 

metabolism. 
22. Relate metabolic disorders and vitamin deficiency to brain dysfunction (Role 

of thiamine vitamin in CNS & related dis, PDH deficiency, Phenylketonuria, 
Maple syrup Urine Disease). 

23. Explain one carbon unit metabolism. 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

INTRODUCTION TO CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM (Reading only} 

CLASSIFICATION OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM: 

Anatomically, it is divided into: 
1. Central nervous system (CNS) 

Includes the brain and spinal cord (Fig.1.1) that are not 
Spinal nerve 

capable of regeneration, thus are protected by: : 
e Bones (skull & vertebral column) AN 
eo Three meninges (pia mater, arachnoid mater and vm 

dura mater) H 
eo Cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) in the subarachnoid space. ( \ 

1 A 
The brain is subdivided into {Fig.1.2): Fig.1.1: CNS & PNS 
- Two cerebral hemispheres (right & left) 
- Between them is a diencephalon (the thalamus, Cerebral 

hypothalamus, subthalamus, metathalamus & JX hemisphere 
epithalamus), 

- Below it is the brainstem (midbrain, pons & 
medulla oblongata), 

- Behind this is the cerebellum. 

2. Peripheral nervous system (PNS) which includes 
e 12 pairs of cranial nerves Midbraife="" Ca 

Brainstem< Pon 
e 31 pairs of spinal nerves 

{ Meddll h Cerebellum 

e All ganglia. The details of the PNS are described in Fig.1.2: Parts of brain 

the regional anatomy books. 
The PNS is subdivided into: 

1) Afferent (sensory) branch of the PNS: the branch that carries sensory information towards 
the CNS. When information arises from the skin, skeletal muscles, or joints this is known 
as somatic sensory information; when information arises from the blood vessels or internal 
organs, this is known as visceral sensory information. 
2) Motor (efferent) branch of the PNS: the branch that carries signals 
away from the CNS to the effector organs. When the effector organ is a skeletal muscle, the 
information is called somatic (voluntary) motor; when the éffector organ is cardiac or smooth 
muscle or glands, the information is called visceral (autonomic) motor. (Fig.1.3)



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Afferent nerve 

8 
— 

7 — 

Spinal cord 
Muscle 

Poe 
Efferent nerve 

Fig.1.3: Functional neurons of the nervous system 

Physiologically, the nervous system is divided into: 
1. Somatic nervous system comprises: 

a. Sensory System. 
b. Motor system 
c. Centers: integrate and processes information, initiates responses and integrates thoughts 
emotions and other mental processes 

2. Autonomic nervous system(visceral): which is involuntary and includes a sympathetic and 
parasympathetic system 

Embryologically, the neural tube gives the spinal cord and 
three brain vesicles (Fig.1.4): Telencephalic 

1. Forebrain (prosencephalon) which gives a vesicles 
median diencephalon (its cavity is the 3™ Lateral /& 
ventricle) and 2 telencephalons or cerebral ventricles I~ | 
hemispheres (each contains a cavity is the \ WAN \W/ 
lateral ventricle) rd 

2. Midbrain (mesencephalon) whose cavity is 3 ventricle >Pienceptislon 
the cerebral aqueduct of Sylvius Cerebral aqueduct Mesencephalon 

3. Hind brain (rhombencephalon) which a ventricle Rh ombencephha lon 
includes the pons, medulla oblongata and 
cerebellum 
(its cavity is the 4tventricle) 

Fig.1.4: Parts of neural tube



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

DEFINITIONS: 
Grey matter & white matter: 

In the CNS, the cell bodies form the grey matter while the nerve fibers form the white matter. 
- In the spinal cord, the white matter surrounds the grey matter which is H-shaped. 
- In the brain stem, the grey matter collects into nuclei embedded in the white matter. 
- In the cerebral hemispheres and the cerebellum, part of the grey matter collects into deep 

nuclei and another part spreads on the surface forming the cortex. 

Nucleus= a collection of cell bodies that have the same function within the CNS. Outside the CNS, a 
collection of cell bodies is called ganglion. 

Tract (fasciculus)= a bundle of nerve fibers within the CNS having the same origin, same termination 
and same function. Bundles outside the CNS constitute nerves. 

Pathway= a chain of successive tracts having the same function (e.g. carrying pain sensation). 

Lemniscus= collection of ascending fibers in the brainstem. 

Commissure= a band of white or grey matter connecting the right & left sides of the CNS across the 
midline. 

Decussation= a point at which an ascending or descending tract crosses the midline. 

Synapse= site of contact between two neurons; usually between the axon of one neuron and the 
dendrites of the other neuron. 

The functions of the nervous system: 

The nervous system performs regulatory and coordinating activities that are essential for the 
human body to function normally. The nervous system functions include: 

1. Maintenance of homeostasis: by stimulating or inhibiting different body activities to help 
maintain homeostasis. For example, the nervous system increases heart rate and force of 
contraction when body demands are increased as during exercise 

2. Receiving and integrating sensory impulses: sensory receptors monitor many external and 
internal stimuli. Impulses from sensory receptors are received and processed by the nervous 
system either under conscious level {vision, hearing, taste, smell, touch, pain, body position, 
and temperature), or under unconscious level (blood pH, blood gases, and blood pressure). 

3. Integrating information: the brain and spinal cord are the major organs for processing sensory 
input and for initiating responses. The input may produce an immediate response, be stored 
as memory, or be ignored. 

4. Controlling muscles and glands: the nervous system controls the major movements of the 
body by controlling skeletal muscle. Although the nervous system does not initiate contraction 
in cardiac muscle and some smooth muscle because they contract auto rhythmically, it can 
cause the contractions to occur more rapidly or more slowly. In addition, the nervous system 
controls the secretions from many glands, including sweat glands, salivary glands, and glands 
of the digestive system. 

9. Maintaining mental activity: the brain is the center of mental activities, including 
consciousness, thinking, memory, and emotions. 



CHAPTER |: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Histological Structure of the Central Nervous System 

Histologically, the CNS is formed of nerve cells (Neurons), supporting cells (Neuroglia); and blood 
capillaries. 

Neurons: Nerve cells are classified into pseudounipolar, bipolar and multipolar. In the CNS, most 
neurons are multipolar. (Previously discussed) 
nA g neurons is called a nucleus. 
eNeurno  

e Neuroglia are the interstitial supporting cells of the nervoils tissue. 

e In H&E-stained sections, only the nuclei of neuroglia can be seen. 
oe They can be detected by using silver or gold impregnation method. 

("Types )off neurog lia My lein (exe pn) 
bTInY eC NS gal  glia): 3 mora3 

> 1. ol ighdendrtytes a 3- Microglia ve 
25 Astrocytes. ] 4- Ependymal cells 

In the PNS: 
1. Schwann cells 2- Satellite cells 
a ———— 

1. Oligodendrocytes (Oligodendroglia) (Fig.1.5) 
Origin: ectodermal. 
Site: white matter of CNS 
Shape: 

® Small in size with rounded, dark 
nuclei and thin cytoplasmic processes. 

® Each process becomes a sheet-like and wraps repeatedly 
around a portion of a nearby axon forming the myelin 
sheath in CNS. 

® One oligodendrocyte can myelinate up to 60 axons. Fig.1.5: Oligodendrocytes 
® The cytoplasm is filled with microtubules but lacks 

intermediate filaments and glycogen. 
Function: 
e Form the myelin sheath of nerve fibers in CNS. Each cell can form myelin sheath of several 

internodal segments on the same axon or different axons. 
e Support the neurons. 
e [Insulation of nerve impulses. 
N.B.: White and gray matter contain a pool of adult progenitor cells, which can differentiate to 
oligodendrocytes that might remyelinate axons in pathologically demyelinated regions. 
Multiple sclerosis (MS): it is a chronic inflammatory disease of the CNS characterized by loss of 
myelin. During periods of activity of the disease, lymphocytes (T cells) initiate an inflammatory 
response accompanied by loss of oligodendrocytes and axon demyelination in the white matter. 



] 

CHAPTER I: "OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

2. Astrocytes (Fig.1.6) 
Origin: ectodermal. 
Site: white and gray matter. They are the most numerous glial cells in gray matter. 
Shape: star-like, they have processes which end by expanded parts termed astrocyte feet that 
make contact with blood capillaries, neurons or nerve fibers. These processes are connected by 
gap junctions. 
Nucleus: large, ovoid or rounded. 
The cytoplasm contains: 

* Microtubules 
x * The intermediate filaments (glial filaments), which is formed of Glial fibrillary acid protein 
Mo l Kel & (GFAP) hich is used as a marker for the brain tumor, Astrocytoma. 

* Thread-like mitochondria. 
= Glycogen 

fibrous astrocyte 

Fig.1.6: Types of astrocytes 

5 ypes of astrocytes: 
)C W A. Fibrous astrocytes: found mainlyi n the(white matte). Have long, thin processes. 

B. Protoplasmic astrocytes: found mainlyi n the gray matter) Have short extensive processes. 
N.B.: Astrocytes with specialized morphology: Miiller cells in the retina and pituicytes of the 
posterior pituitary. 
Function of astrocytes: 
1. Regulate metabolic exchange between neurons and blood. 

. Secrete factors regulating neural functions. 

. Regulate the extracellular ionic concentration around the neurons. 

. Regulate the diameter of blood vessels within the CNS. 

. Support neurons. 

. Form a part of the blood brain barrier. 

. Repair processes by proliferation and formation of glial tissue {glial scar). 

. They store glycogen within their cytoplasm which can be broken down into glucose and 
further into lactate, both of which are released to surrounding neurons. 

oO OY Un ~~ WN



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

3. Microglia (Fig.1.7) 
Origin: blood monocytes 
Site: gray and white matter of the brain and the spinal cord, in the retina and optic nerve 
Shape: small spindle shaped cells with branching poles. The cell body and processes have minute 
spines on their surfaces. 
Nucleus: dense, elongated nucleus 
Cytoplasm: scanty. 
Function of microglia: 
e Microglial cells are the phagocytes of the CNS. 
e Microglial cells express receptors for neurotransmitters and thus may influence the synaptic 

transmission. 
e During development microglial cells remove apoptotic cells. 

GLIAL CELLS 

Oligodendrocytes —_— Microglia 

Fig.1.7: Neuroglia cells 
4. Ependymal cells {(Ependyma) 

Origin: ectodermal 
Site: lines the ventricles of the brain and the central canal of the spinal cord. 
Shape: Cuboidal or columnar. They do not rest on a basement membrane. Apical surfaces have 
numerous microvilli and cilia. 
Types: 

a. Ependymal cells lining the third and fourth ventricles: 
e Apical surfaces have numerous microvilli 
e Numerous mitochondria and basal infoldings 
e Basal nuclei. 
e Joined by tight junctions and desmosome. 

b. Tanycytes (ependymal astrocytes). These cells have basal processes that facilitate the 

passage of hypothalamic- regulating hormones to pars distalis of pituitary gland. 

c. Choroidal epithelium: 
e Highly modified ependyma. 
¢ lies adjacent to the vascular layer of the choroid plexuses. 

9



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Functions of ependyma 
e Play a role in the circulation of CSF (by their cilia). 
e Absorptive function (by their microvilli). 

e Some ependymal cells may be stem cells in adult human brain, but their potential for neural 
regeneration is still under investigation. 

The choroid plexus: 
e [tis found in the roofs of the third and fourth ventricles and the medial walls of the lateral 

ventricles. 

e [tis formed of invaginated leaf like protrusions {villi} into the ventricular cavity. 

e Each villus is formed of a central core of pia mater with fenestrated blood capillaries and 

covered by columnar ependymal cells which line the brain ventricles. 

Function: Secretion of cerebrospinal fluid. 
N.B.: Hydrocephalus: 

¢ [tis a case in which excess quantity of cerebrospinal fluid is present in the brain cavities, that 
increases the intracranial pressure. 

e Causes: 1) A decrease in absorption of cerebrospinal fluid. 
2) Obstruction of SCF outflow from the ventricles. 

e Congenital hydrocephalus results in an enlargement of the head, followed by brain atrophy, 
mental impairment and muscular weakness. 

Brain Barriers 
1. Blood — brain barrier (BBB): {Fig.1.8) 

It is formed of: 
a) The endothelial cells of the continuous blood capillaries which are tightly sealed together by 

\ tight junction (Zonula occludens). 
\v b) The continuous basement membrane of the endothelial cells of the capillaries. 

c) The pericytes of the blood capillaries 
px d) The limiting layer of perivascular astrocytic feet (Foot processes of astrocytes) that completely 
Ra encircles the basal lamina of the capillaries. 

3) Th 2 choroid plexu ] where CSF is produced. 

Function of the blood-brain barrier: 
It protects the brain tissue against toxic drugs and other harmful substances as bacteria that may 
be present in the blood. 

10



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Fig.1.8: Components of the blood brain-barrier 

2. The blood - CSF barrier (Fig.1.9): 

It is formed of: | Tio junctions 
a) Endothelial cells of the fenestrated blood NOL 

capillaries. 
b) The basement membrane of the endothelial 

e
capillaries. 000 p=itheliu m 

¢) The connective tissue on which the ependymal 
cells rest. Ll J 

Ae sr" CONCH 
d) The ependymal cells that are connected CY

apically by junctional complex. ~~ Fenestration 
Lumen 

(> Caphlary 

Fig.1.9: Blood CSF barrier 

11

i S ——— 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Histological Structure of the Cerebral Cortex 
# 

The surface of the cerebrum contains sulci (grooves) separated from each other by wide areas (gyri). 
It is formed of: RN 
1) Gray matter: ays 4 sulci 

Covers the gyrrii  and lines the sulci. Iti s formed af nerve cells neuroglia and blood capillaries. 
2) White matter: - 

Degp to the gray matter, it is formed of nerve fibers, neuroglia and blood capillaries. 

Cells of the cerebral cortex: (Fig. 1.10) 

3 Pyramidal cells (P): [age 
They have pyramidal cell body and ardyariablg in 
size; small, medium, large and giant cells. {== \ | aa 

- The apex of the cells is directed to the surface of 
the cerebrum. The dendrites arise from the apex 
and the two sides of the cells. I extemal 

| lar | 
~ The axons arise from the base of the cells and pass rEAar ye! 

to the white matter. W N 
2) Granule cells (G):  SenSahv” ) Il externa 
-  Theyare small polygonal cells (5-7 um). ri 

- Some cellsg ive rise to short dendrites in the 
same layer, other cells give long dendrites that ? a’ Vinten 
pass to reach the surface granular layer 

- Their axons terminate in the deep cortical layers. 

3} Fusiform cells (F): y V ganglionic 
- They have gspindlelshaped cell body. nd 
- The dendrites arise from the two poles of the cell, cells) 

The axon arises from the middle part oft he cell 
body to pass to the white matter. . —_— 

4) Cells of Martinotti (M): (polymorphic) 
- These are called cells of the ascending axons, cell layer 

present in all layers. 
- They have a small, triangceulll badry. bv vA | 
, Their axons‘ extend to reach the superficiall ayers. 
5) Horizontal cells of Cajal (H): Fig. 1.10: Cells of the Cerebral Cortex 

- They have spindle shaped cell body present in the 
superficial layers. 

12



«OQ 
CHAPTER Ii na Hie SENSORY SYSTEM 

(y 

Layers of the cerebral cortex: There are six layers arranged as follows: (Fig. 1.11) 

1) Molecular layer: 
This is a DE containing neuroglia and small nerve cells (Horizontal cells of 
Cajal}-and tangential fibers. All processes of cells are confined to this layer. 

rya —  

2) External granular layer: 
This is a layer of dense small closely packed granular nerve cells. 

en, JE SW—an 

3) External pyramidal layer: 
This is a broad layer that containg small and medium-sized) pyramidal cells. Their dendrites pass 

L_ to the first layer, while their axons enter e white matter. 

4) Internal granular layer: 
It contains granular cells as 

Lp ye — grr 

in the 2" layer as well as a 
band of tangential fibers 

uter band of 

External 
5) Inner pyramidal layer: granular layer 

Eg aa ’ F i k=} = 

It contains the large 
pyramidal cells \{g ells) 

External 
reaching 80X50um. Apical pyramidal layer 

dendrites reach the 1st layer 
and axons pass to the white —s-—% External band 

matter. Deep in this layer, the =% of Baillarger 
EE 

hand of Baillarger/is Internal 
granular layer 

“formed of horizontal fibers. 
Other cells-medium and large 
nerve cells are also present, 
which are called cells of Ganghkorc layer == Inner band 

{internal 
Martinotti. === of Bailarger 

pyramidal 
layer) 

6) Pleomorphic or multiform 6 

layer: Muttiform layer 
{layer of 

It contains spindle-shaped polymorphic | 
cells) — 

cells, granule cells, stellate ) 
cells and special cells whose Elterent corlicat libers Alfarans corlical bers 

axons are directed towards Fig. 1.11: Cerebral cortex layers 

the surface. Fibers of spindle- 

shaped cells pass to the white matter. 

13 



CHAPTER i: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Fibers of the cerebral cortex: 
I. Radial fibers: 

a) Afferent fibers of thalamo-cortical radiation. 

b) Efferent fibers of corticospinal, corticoreticular and corticopontine fibers. | 

Il. Horizontal fibers: which are arrangeind: 
a) Tangential fibers running in the first layer. 
b) Outer and inner bands of Baillarger. These are terminal branches of afferent fibers that bend 

horizontally to synapse with the cortical cells. 

Differences between the motor cortex and the sensory cortex: 
The motor cortex:  P7AM dal } 

o |tisthe fhickest zone\in the whole cortex. 
e Small and medium-sized pyramidal cells are found in layers lll, while the giant pyramidal cells are 

seen in the fifth layer. 

e Granule cells are rare or absent. 

The sensory cortex: ~~ Fea (a 
e It is relatively thinner than motor cortex. 

e It contains closely packed granule cells. 

e Pyramidal cells are ill defined. 

The meninges (Fig. 1.12) 
The brain and the spinal cord are surrounded by three coverings called the meninges: 

The dura mater, the arachnoid, the pia mater. The arachnoid and the pia mater together are called 

the leptomeninges. 

1) The dura mater: 
It is the outermost layer, formed of dense fibro-elastic connective tissue that is continuous with 

the periosteum of the skull. Its inner surface is covered by simple squamous epithelium. It is 

separated from the arachnoid by the subdural space. Around the spinal cord, it is separated from 

the periosteum of the vertebrae by epidural space. 

2) The arachnoid: 
It is a delicate membrane between the dura and the pia mater. It is formed of: 

a) Flat membrane which is adjacent to the inner surface of dura mater. 

b) A system of thin trabeculae which is composed of collagen fibers and fibrobasts. It extends 

from the inner surface of the flat membrane to be continuous with the underlying pia mater. 

These trabeculae surround sponge-like cavities called subarachnoid spaces which are filled 

with cerebrospinal fluid (CSF). Both surfaces of arachnoid and the trabeculae are covered by 

simple squamous epithelium. 

14



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

The arachnoid villi: 

In certain areas, the arachnoid penetrates the dura forming the arachnoid villi to reach the venous 

sinuses located within the dura. These villi help in CSF circulation from subarachnoid spaces into 

the blood sinuses of the dura. 

3) The pia mater: 
it is a delicate vascular layer of 

ey. Cranium 
connective tissue that invests the 

brain and the spinal cord. It contains Dura mater 

a layer of leptomeningeal cells 1-2 Venoussinus 

cells thick, in which the cells are 
Arachnoid 

joined by desmosomes, gap membrane 

junctions and few tight junctions. 

The pia mater is separated from Pla mater 

brain tissue by thin layer of 
hi wd 

- 

astrocytic processes. The pia mater = Brain 

and these processes form a physical 
space i Me 

barrier separating brain tissue from 

CSF in the subarachnoid space. 

Fig.1.12: Structure of meninges and sub-arachnoid space 

15 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

ENERGY SOURCES OF THE BRAIN 
« Brain fuels are food stuffs that supply the brain with energy which is used to constantly 

“recharge the batteries” of neurons, the information processing units of the brain. 

« The signaling mechanisms between neurons necessary for information processing represent 

approximately 90% of the energy used by the brain. 
. The brain is an energy-hungry organ as it usest en times more energy than the rest of the 

organs. 

Types of Brain Fuels 
1. Glucose, whichi s the principal fuel of the brain 
2. Moorn ocarhoxylic acids, including L-lactate, acetate and pyruvate 
3. The ketone-bodies: acetoacetate and B-hydroxy-butyrate 

Sources of brain fuels: 

1-During well-fed state 
Dietary carbohydrates are digested giving glucose which is the|main fuel of the brain. 

a 
2-Dduurriinn g fasting state ; 

Fasting begins approximately 2 t0o 4 hour} after a meal. 
» Glucose fast 

o Liver glycogen is degraded by the process of gycogenoysi which supplies glucose to 

the blood. Slew | 
» Also, the liver performs gluconeogenesis the synthesis of glucose from non-carbohydrate 

compounds) to produce glucose. The major sources of carbon for gluconeogenesis are lactate, 
glycerol, and amino acids. | 

» Ketone bodies 
. In the starved state the brain begins to oxidize ketone hadies for-energy. ketone bodies are 
prod uced by the 

3-Lactate is an alternative fuel. 
» Llactate is formed by muscles during sustained physical exe rci se) 
« Under such conditions, the brain uses lactate as a fuel. 
« Increased plasma lactate results in a decrease in glucose utilization by the brain, raising the 

possibility that lactate is preferentially used by neurons over glucose as an energy source. 

The main brain fuels pathways to produce energy: 
1. Glucose: 

Glucose enters cells through specific glucose transporters (GLUTs) and is phosphorylated by 

hexokinase (HK) to produce glucose-6-phosphate. As in other organs, glucose 6-phosphate can be 

processed via different metabolic pathways 
(a) Glycolysis (leading to lactate production or mitochondrial metabolism), 
(b) The pentose phosphate pathway (PPP). 
(c) Glycogenesis and glycogenolysis (in astrocytes only). 

16 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

2. The ketone bodies: 
* Acetoacetate and B-hydroxy-butyrate, enter the brain ccee lls by a separate ‘specific 

transporters ystem... PE 
. Acetoacetate and B- hydroxy-butyrate!a re conmeried tq acetyl CoA and then oxidized i n 

ga iii I I aa 
sbelnteernraerieinalndbon, 

"the TCA cycle, withs ubsequent generation oc f ATP. 

The astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle (Figure 1.13) 

* In addition to heurons, brain cells include |n on-neuronal cells such as  astrocytes which play a 
central rrool e |i n brain energy metabolism. 

*a  

PYRUVATE 

LDHs_ 

fi oH 4 oT i ET " i 

| ‘Figure (1.13): Astrocyte neuron lactate shuttle 
. Astrguyles uptake glucose from the circulation through the glucose transporter G LUTL. 
° Glycolytically derived pyruvate is converted to lactate by lactate dehydrogenase 5 (LDHS5; 

mainly expressed in astrocytes) ‘and “shuttled to neurons through monocarboxylate 
transporters (mainly MCT1 and MCT2i n neurons). 8 | 

* In neurons, this lactate can be used as an energy substrate following its conversion to 
pyruvate ( Pyr} by LDH1 (mainly expressedi n neurons). 

* Neurons can also take up glucose via the fieuronal glucose transporter 3 (GLUT3).\ 

17 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

mADE NAD* 

HO-Ctt 
EH 

Laciate 

The importance of astrocyte-neuron lactate shuttle: 
* Neurons have a,‘ slower glycolytic rate than astrocytes as b6- phosphofructose-2- 

kinase fructose-2, 6-b isphosphatase-3 (Pfkfb3) enzyme is absent in neurons, due”t ots 
Constant proteasomal degradation. 

« In contrast it ischighly.e)x pressed |i n astrocytes. This enzyme is responsible for the generation 

 Macired- 2,6- bisphosphate |(fructose- 2,6-P2), a potent activator of the glycolytic enzyme 

hosphofructokinase-1 (PFK). 
Astrocytic Glycogen Metabolism 
Astrocytes are thee nergetic warehouse of the brain: they are the only cells that contain glycogen. 
Astrocytes can perform glycogenesis and glycogenolysis. Cid 
The Control of the astrocytic glycogen contents: 
(1) Glycogen content is under the dynamic control of neurotransmitters (e.g., noradrenaline, 

serotonin, and vasoactive intestinal peptide [VIP]), neurohumoral agents (e.g., insulin), and local 

energy status (e.g., glucose levels). 
(2) Decreased neuronal activity, as observed during sleep and anesthesia, is associated with 

increased levels of brain glycogen. 
(3) Increased neuronal activity induced by sensory stimulation is associated with a decrease in 

glycogen levels in the activated areas, demonstrating a tight coupling between neuronal activity and 

glycogen mobilization. 
(4) Astrocytic glycogen mobilization (likely associated with the transfer of lactate from astrocytes to 

neurons) is required to sustain neuronal activity. 
(Remembert he astrocyte-neuron. lactate shuttle) 
The Hexose Monophosphate AP) bathway antioxidant defense rolei n the brain 

« HMP pathway produdes hichi s utilized by glutathione reductase to regenerate GSH 

fromGS SG. a 
* This process is essential for the maintenance of GSH in its reduced form and thus for its 

availability for the“ detoxification of ROS.” | 
The importance of brain energy metabolism 
1-Maintenance and restoration ofi on gradients such as postsynaptic and action potentials, as well 

as uptake and recycling of neurotransmitters. 
2- The foods we consume greatly affect brain function, including everything from learning and 

memory to emotions and cognitive support. 

Brain energy metabolism impairment 
Impairmenti n this process resultsi n: 
Perturbatioonf neuralogical fiinctions, loss of consciousness and coma within minutes. 

18 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

SPINAL CORD EXTERNAL FEATURES (Fig. 1.14) 

0 Site: 
- QOccupies the upper 2/3 of the vertebral canal. 
- Begins opposite the upper border of Atlas Tube of Als 

. : Dura& 
vertebra, as a continuation of the medulla = Cervical 
oblongata. enlargement 

- Ends opposite the disc between L1 & 2 in adults. 
At birth, it ends opposite L3. Later, the vertebral Lina 
column grows faster than the spinal cord. Tien 

a Length= 45 cm. la =—_  pies 
0 Shape: cylindrical but shows: a E Sa 

2 enlargements 3 ¥ terminale 
1. Cervical enlargement gives origin to brachial n NN 

plexus (C4-T1) ANY | 
2. Lumbar enlargement gives origin to lumbar & Fig. 1.14: Spinal cord 

sacral plexuses (L1-S4). 

A tapering lower end called conus medullaris. From its apex, a thin filament of pia mater called 
filum terminale extends down to be attached to the back of coccyx. 

31 segments = 8 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral & | coccygeal. Segments are not 
demarcated externally but each segment gives origin to a pair of spinal nerves. 

Posterior median sentum 

Posterolateral sulci 

— Anterolateral sulci 

Anterior median sulcus 

Fig. 1.15: 1.5 in spinal cord 

Longitudinal grooves: (Fig. 1.15) an anterior median fissure & a posterior median septum divide 
the cord almost completely into right and left halves. In addition, 2 posterolateral & 2 
anterolateral sulci give attachment to posterior & anterior roots of spinal nerves respectively. 

ATTACHMENT OF SPINAL NERVES (Fig. 1.16) 

A. Each spinal nerve arises from a spinal cord segment by 2 roots: 
1. Anterior root: contains 

- Motor fibers (from the anterior horn) 
- t+ Autonomic fibers (from the lateral horn). 

15 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

2. Posterior root: purely sensory. Carries post. root ganglion (spinal ganglion) containing 

pseudounipolar neurons. 
- Their peripheral processes (dendrites) pass peripherally 

- Their central processes (axons) enter the cord at the posterolateral sulcus. 

B. Both roots unite forming a mixed nerve, which exits the vertebral canal through the 

intervertebral foramen (IVF) and soon divides into 2 rami (both are mixed): 
1. Anterior ramus (large): 

- All anterior rami form plexuses except the 12 thoracic (intercostal nerves) 

- Only 14 anterior rami (12 thoracic + upper 2 lumbar) send white rami communicants 

[preganglionic] to sympathetic ganglia, they are axons of neurons in the lateral horn. 

All 31 anterior rami receive grey rami communicants [postganglionic] from sympathetic 

ganglia, they are axons of neurons in the sympathetic ganglia. 

2. Posterior ramus (small): supplies muscles & skin of the back. 

N.B: 
e Both rami of C1 spinal nerve are purely motor 

e Recurrent meningeal nerve: It is the first branch of the mixed spinal nerve, just outside IVF. it re- 

enters the spinal canal via IVF to supply the dura, periosteum, blood vessels & /.V. discs. It plays 

a role in referred pain or occipital headache. 

Past, root 

Post. root ganglion a | 2 

PE ramus a ; ; Cervical 

ray = Lin = 
A \} ip 2 

Sympathetic Ant. ramus Id 3 

Ant.root ganglion 7 jl : 
(bem A 

7 \ “a 7 Thoracic 
al 8 

74N8
  T\
oym m— 
 a 1—0>  
A 

Intervertebral foramen s he 1 

Fig. 1.16: Attachement of spinal nerves ~ - 2 

Levels: spinal cord segments do not lie opposite the corresponding % Yorum a 

vertebrae = = : 

- In the cervical region, subtract one from the number of spinal oy J & > 

cord segment to get the corresponding vertebra (e.g., C6 i4 % 4 

segment is opposite C5 vertebra) A oy iia 

- In the upper 6 thoracic segments subtract 2 (e.g., T6 segment is N = 
opposite T4 vertebra) (Figure 1.17). 

Fig. 1.17: Vertebral levels 

20 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

- In the lower 6 thoracic segments subtract 3 
(e.g., T12 segment is opposite T9 vertebra) 

- In the lumbar segments subtract 4 (e.g., LS is 
opposite L1 vertebra). 

- All sacral & coccygeal segments are opposite L1 
vertebra. 

Direction of roots: C1&2 are horizontal, C3-T12 are 
oblique, L1-Co are vertical. 
Exit of spinal nerves from the vertebral canal: 
- C1-7 pass above corresponding vertebrae. 
- C8 passes below C7 vertebra. | 
- T1-L5 pass below corresponding vertebra. (C2- 

LS exit via intervertebral foramina) 
- 51-4 pass via the ant. & post. sacral foramina. 
- 85 & Co pass via the sacral hiatus. Fig. 1.18 spinal nerves 
The collection of spinal nerves that surround the film terminale below the termination of the 
spinal cord (i.e., below L2) is called cauda equina (Fig. 1.18) because it resembles a horse tail. | 
They occupy the lower 1/3 of the vertebral canal & the sacral canal. | 

Applied anatomy: Nerve compression 

The size of the spinal nerves increases gradually from above 
downwards. The largest spinal nerve is the 1% sacral. 
Meanwhile, the size of the intervertebral foramina decreases 
from above downwards. The 4th" & 5% lumbar nerves are the 
most liable to compression. 
3 meningeal coverings of spinal cord: (Fig. 1.19) 

1. The dura mater (outer layer) & arachnoid mater (middle layer) 
form one tube together. Above, it is continuous 
with the cerebral meninges at the foramen magnum. 
Below, it ends opposite S2. 

2. Pia mater (inner layer) is adherent to the cord & continues 
below as the filum terminale 
which pierces the tube of dura & arachnoid to be attached to 
the back of coccyx. 

Spaces between meninges: (Fig. 1.20) 
1. Extradural (epidural) space: between the dura and vertebral column. Contains fat, small arteries, 

venous plexus & lymphatics. 
Z. Subdural space: between the dura & arachnoid. Contains a thin film of fiuid 
3. Subarachnoid space: between the arachnoid & pia. Contains CSF + 3 ligaments supporting the 

spinal cord: 
a. Filum terminale. 
b. Ligamentum denticulatum: one on each side of the cord, extending laterally between the 

anterior and posterior roots of spinal nerves. Laterally, it has 21 teeth connecting the pia (on 
one side) to the arachnoid and dura (on the other side). 

¢. Subarachnoid septum: extends from the posterior median septum to the arachnoid mater. 

21 

a— 

= 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Subarachnoid septum Dura 

Arachnold 

Fig. 1.20: spaces between spinal meninges 

Applied: Lumbar Puncture (Fig. 1.21) 
A needle is introduced to the spinal subarachnoid space 
below the end of the spinal cord 
Site: 
Just above or just below the tip of 4 lumbar spine (which 
lies opposite an imaginary line connecting the highest 
points of iliac crests). 
Uses: 
1. Diagnostic: to measuring CSF pressure, obtain sample 

for analysis (meningitis), or inject air for contrast X-ray 
(air encephalography). 

2. Therapeutic: to remove some CSF to relieve increased © 
intracranial tension, or to inject antibiotics or spinal 

N ig. 1.21: lumbar puncture == 
anesthesia, 

22 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

NEUROTRANSMITTERS 
Definition: 

Neurotransmitters (NTs) are substances used by neurons to communicate with one 

another and with their target tissues in the process of synaptic transmission 

(neurotransmission). 
Prior to their release into the synaptic cleft, NTs are stored in secretory vesicles (called 

synaptic vesicles). "ET 
When released, the NT crosses the synaptic gap and binds to specific receptors in the 

membrane of the post-synaptic neuron or cell. 

Thus, NTs are considered as the brain chemicals that communicate information 

throughout our brain and body. 

1. Catecholamine (dopamine, norepinephrine and epinephrine) 

Catecholamines are substances consisting of catechol (an aromatic structure with two 

hydroxyl groups) linked to an amine. 

They are synthesized from the amino acid tyrosine. 

Dopamine and norepinephrine are synthesized in the brain and function as 

neurotransmitters. 

Norepinephrine as epinephrine are also synthesized i| n the adrenal a 

Synthesis of catecholamines (Figure 1.22): 

-Tyrosine is hydroxylated by tyrosine hydroxylase which requires the coenzyme 

tetrah,drobiopterin (BH4) and the product is 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA). 

-Tyrosine hydroxylase is th rate-limiting step in the catecholamine production. 

-DOPA is decarboxylated to dopamine by DOPA decarboxylase which requires the coenzym PLP, 

-Dopamine is hydroxylated by dopamine -hydroxylase to yield norepinephrine in a reaction that 

requires ascorbic acid and copper. | 
-Norepinephrine is methylated by the enzyme phenyl-ethanolamine N-methyl-transferase to 

form epinephrine. 

-In the newborn the primary end product in the meduila is norepinephrine, but with advancing 

age thereis a dramatic rise in he epinepITing content. This conversion depends “pon cortisol. 
pce reece r SL re ee MR a 2 li i —— 

Tyrosine 
| CH,CHCOO™ aw CH,CHCOO™ Mul"  “a 
| NH, NH, = > Asoconrb-at e 
HO HO HO 

a Xo. | 
Tyrosine Hep on py 3 a Boren 

phenylalanine 0 : Cu*? 
| (dopa) ol | 

OH Hs Phe lthanc d-¢- | 
HS ® Dehydro- 

J HO ud 
S-Adenosyl-  S-Ade 

comine OO) Nodinisbin 2 mthioniWn (SeAM) k J 

MH zoytisol 

Figure (1.22): Synthesis of catecholamines 

23 



nydrglases 5 Teydt bio plea 
decarbocgbses —o PLP ( prrocecc] phospla de) ete 13 

CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Fate of catecholamines: SE eres 

GQ.)ct ive uptake by sympathetic nerve endings: It is the frajor fate for circulating 

catecholamines. 

LZC atabolism fo biologically inactive products: 

A) Dopamine: By Monoamine oxidase(  MAO) land Catechol-O-Methyl Transferase [[COMT)) 
EE — -~ 

into nillic acid (HVA). LEE 

B) EpinephiFine and norepinephrineB:y MAO and COMT into{Vanillylmandelic acid (VMA). 
Clinical considerations of catecholamines: iB 

A. Phenylethanolamine N-methyl transferase enzyme: 

It is induced by glucocorticoids. As, in the adrenal medulla there is high co 

glucocorticoids than in the plasma, so, in the adrenal medulla there Ee .) 

as compared to that of norepinephrine. While, in sympathetic nerve endings, norepinephrine 

level is highert han that of epinephrine. 
( B. Parkinson's Disease) 

* A neurodegenerative movement disorder, due tq insufficient dopamine] production as a 

result of the idiopathic loss of dopamine-producing cellsi n the brain. 

a Decreased HVA levels in urine. 

= The main aim of drug therapy for this disease is to replace the deficiency of dopamine in the 

basal ganglia. Because dopamine does not ¢ the blood-brai ier, its immediate 

metabolic precursor (L-D OPA, or levo-dopa),| which does cross this barrier, is administered 

orally. L-DOPAis transported into the brain where it ts decarboxylated to dopamine 

* Inrecentye ars, a combination df L-DOPA and carbidopa (Sinemet)Jhas been prescribed for 

this disease. Carbidopai s an inhibitor of dopa- decarboxylase and reduces the 

decarboxylatioonf L-DOPiAn  the peripheral tissues, enabling a greater concentration of this 

precursor tf reach the brain. Carbido oes no € “brain barrier) Therefore, 

~ conversion of L-DOPA tdo opamidnoes not diminish in the brain. 

(Cc. a-methyl dop3is useidn the treatment of hypertension as it can competitively inhibit DOPA 

decarboxylase. 

D. Pheochromocytomaj A tumor of the chromaffin cells of adrenal medulla. Iti s manifested 2 

excessive production of catecholamines leading to hypertension which is treated b 

(tyrosing which competes with tyrosine for tyrosine hydroxylase enzyme causing inhibition of 

catecholamine synthesis. The normal level of YMAi n urine is 5 mg/day andi s increased upp  to  500 

mg/dayi n pheochro 
('E. Monoamine oxidase inhibitors (MAOIs):h  

- In the neurons, MAOIs inactivate the enzyme and Aof  epinephrine and 

[Serotonin. 

- The neurotransmitters molecules escape degradation, accumulate within the presynaptic 

neuron and leak into the synaptic space. This causes activation of their receptors and explains 

the antidepressant action of these drugs. 

24 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

2. Serotonin 

Serotonin is a biologically active amine produced in CNS, by frgentaffin cells\of gastrointestinal 
tract nd les 
Functionsof  serotonin: 

1. In CNS: 

a- Acts as neurotransmitter. 

b- Regulation of sleep, cognitive functions, mood, appetite, blood pressure and temperature. 
c- Source of melatonini n the pineal body. 

EE 

2. Stimulates smooth muscle contraction = vasoconstriction. 
i A She twinstpesetgam————ass 

3. Important fog GIT motility.) } 

Synthesis of gerotonih (Figure 1.2 3): 
ET mh: a 

ga Ap t 

EL eli producing 5-hydroxytryptophan. 

2) 5-hydroxytryptophan is decarboxylated to serotonin. 

i 
NH, 

Cyo ,x g YaOOmX)e rLane  =w e i eH on C"H , ywCulH.  COOH 
) 

2 i H Hoterin IL binpterin N 
I'ry ptophsn : 5-H Try piohpoan 

decarbox yiase PPL? 

pr3 

“Co™ CH, NH, 

H 
5.0OH Tryptamine (Serotonin) 

Figure (1.23): Synthesis of serotonin 

Degradation of serotonin: 

Serotonin-is degraded by monoamine oxidase enzyme (MAO) producing 5-hydroxyindolacetic 

Ky 
Clinical considerations of serotonin: 

A. Carcinoid tumor (argentaffinoma): 

Is atumor of argentaffin cells of gastrointestinal tract. 

e Characteri by-ncrease production of serotonin, decrease production of nicotinic acid 

causing] manifestations ofp ellagra Niacin “B3” deficienc ) ig 5-A RR urine. 
B. Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIS): Vp , } } Hy 

Maintain serotonin levels, thereby functioning as@ntidepressants) 

3. Melatonin. 

Serotonin synthesized in the pineal gland serves as a precursor for the synthesis of melatonin. 

25 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Functions of melatonin: 

Stimulates immune system 

Antioxidant (protects against free radical) 

e |[nvolveed inffegu lating sleep patterns ) 

e Its formation follows { circadian rhythr) (diurnal variation); it is stimulated by dark and 

inhheibdintieddi obidyn  Bliisyg: ht. 
o Melatonin levels may befrelated to aging Where levels decraes awe sage. 

4. Nitric oxide (NO) 

Synthesis of NO (Figure 1. 23):  | 
Nitric oxidei s formed fro © arginine by the action of nitric oxide synthase enzyme. 

amfpon 

NHS z 
CHo — NH—C’ CH, —NH—C’ 

NH» nitric NH» 
CH» oxide CH» 

202 NO 
CHn~ 72 + 2HAHO 

CH-NHZF » CH-NHY 

COO~ COO~ 
arginine NADPE NADP citrulline 

Figure (1.24): Synthesis of nitric oxide 

Functions of NO: 

1. Is a potent vasodilator of cerebral, coronary and muscular arter ies 

2. It relaxes smooth muscles of GGIIT  leading to decresea sGGIeT and uu rogenital tract motility by 

actniengu arso at ransmitter. 

It stimulates release of hormones from the hypothalamus. 

It is produced by macrophages, monocytes and neutrophils W S———y 

Pharmacological functions of NO: 

Nitroglycerin is used in the treatment : Vas it stimulates the release of NO causing 
vasodilatation. 

b. Inhalation of NO induces pulmonary vasodilatation} locally without decreasing systemic 

bll ood pre ssure. Therefore, it can be used in the treatment of pulmonary hypertension 
ad 

and high-altitude pulmonary edema. oo 

5. Gamma Aminobutyric Acid (GABA) 

_ Principal inhibitory NT C erived from{glutamic acid by glutamic acid decarboxylase2 (GAD) enzyme, 

and pyridoxal phosphat(Be6)  is required why its level |i s reducedi n brain 

ff vitamin B6 deficiency ith signs0  hyperactivity and convulsions. 

26 

8 1 = Lo 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Decathoxylase 
HOOC-(CH.n- CH-COOH a -» HOOC-(CH.2-CH.-NH. 

NH. (PLP) CO. Gama Amino Butyrate 
Glutamate 

Figure (1.25): Synthesis of Gamma Aminobutyric Acid 

6. Histamine | 
Synthesis of histamine (Figure 1. 26): 

o Histaminei s present mostlyi n mast cells 

o Itis synthesized by the decarboxylation of the amino acid histidine hind the reaction is 
catalyzed By histidine decarboxylase enzyme. 

CH, 
Ha N— G— COOH 

Histidine 

Doecarboxylasa 
PLP 

. 

CH, 
Ho, N— CH 

Histamine 

Figure (1.26): Synthesis of histamine 
Functions of histamine: 

e Histamine mediates a wide range of cellular responses, including_allergic )and 
inflammatory reactions, gastric acid secretion. 

eo |tactsasa NTi n parts of the brain by mediating arousal. When activated, it[ increases 
wakefulness arn d induce electrographic arousal. J 

o A powerful vasodilator. 
Agents that interfere with the action of histamine have important therapeutic 
applications. 

7. Glutamate and aspartate 

o Nonessential amino acids. 

» Glutamate i| s the principal excitatory NT and removed by reuptake. 

* Prolonged LAF Sn elevated levels of excitatory amino acids is 
Geurotoxicynd resultsi n(neuronal death or injury. 

8. Glycine 
e Anajor inhibi 

e Synthesized fron serind b serine hydroxymethyltransferase. 

e Removed by reuptake through high-affinity orter. 
ER — See 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Processing of signals in CNS 

Neuronal pools are functional groups of neurons that integrate incoming information and 

forward the processed information to its appropriate destination. Input signals often do not 

affect all pools equally (fractionation of pools), they also do not affect all neurons of certain 

pool equally. 

1-The discharge and facilitated zones of neuronal pools: 

In the central portion of the field in this figure, designated by the circled area, all the 

neurons are stimulated by the incoming fiber. Therefore, this is said to be the discharge zone 

of the incoming fiber, also called the excited zone or liminal zone. To each side, the neurons 

are facilitated but not excited, and these areas are called the facilitated zone, also called the 

subthreshold zone or subliminal zone (Fig. 1.27) 

Gi zone 

i 

Facilitated zone 

Figure (1.27): "Discharge" and "Facilitated" zone of neuronal pool 

(Quoted from Guyton) 

2-Divergence: 

An amplifying type of divergence is shown in( Figure 1.28). This means simply that an 

input signal spreads to an increasing number of neurons as it passes through successive orders 

of neurons in its path. 

Divergence: in same tract Divergence in multiple tracts 
A B 

Figure (1.28): Divergence (Quoted from Guyton) 

28 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

3-Convergence: 
Convergence means signals from multiple inputs uniting to excite a single neuron. 
Figure 1.29 (a) shows convergence from a single source. Figure 1.29 (b) shows convergence from 
multiple sources which is important for providing enough spatial summation to bring the neuron 
to the threshold required for discharge . 

Source 

Comwerganfrcoem 
multiple sources 

B 

Figure (1.29): Convergence (Quoted from Guyton) 

4-After discharge (prolongation of signals): 

* Asignal entering a pool causes a prolonged output discharge, called after discharge, lasting 
a few milliseconds to as long as many minutes after the incoming signal is over. 

e 2 types: synaptic or interneuronal circuits. 

a-Synaptic after discharge: 

When excitatory synapses discharge on the surfaces of dendrites or soma of a neuron, a 
postsynaptic electrical potential develops in the neuron and lasts for many milliseconds, 
especially when some of the long-acting synaptic transmitter substances are involved. 

b-Interneuronal after discharge: 
1-Parallel: the input signals reach the output neuron in the form of successive impulses via 
a number of interneurons, with different numbers, that run in parallel, and consequently 
different synaptic delay times (Figure 1.30). 

i 4 Fo \ 
Input 

i 
Figure (1.30): Parallel after discharge 

29 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

2-Reverberatory (Oscillatory) Circuit : 

o One of the most important of all circuits in the entire nervous system is the 

reverberatory, or oscillatory, circuit. Such circuits are caused by positive feedback 

within the neuronal circuit that feeds back to re-excite the input of the same circuit. 

Consequently, once stimulated, the circuit may discharge repetitively for a long time. 

e The cause of this sudden cessation of reverberation is fatigue of synaptic junctions in 

the circuit. (Figure 1.31). 

input 

D ef 
Figure (1.31): Reverbratory circuits {Quoted From Guyton) 

5-Shortening of signals in neuronal pools: 

A.Direct inhibition: 

Post-synaptic inhibition, e.g. some interneurons in spinal cord that inhibit antagonist muscles. 

Neurotransmitter secreted is glycine. 

B.Indirect inhibition: 

Pre-synaptic inhibition. This happens when an inhibitory synaptic knob lie directly on the 

termination of a pre-synaptic excitatory fiber. The inhibitory synaptic knob releases a 

transmitter (GABA) which inhibits the release of excitatory transmitter from the pre-synaptic 

fiber. 

C.Lateral inhibition: 

While the main pathway (A presynaptic cell ) is excited, it sends an inhibitory signal to the 

nearby neighboring nerve fibers, inhibiting undesired responses leading to focusing and 

sharpening of the response. In hearing, lateral inhibition helps to more sharply tune the ability 

of the brain to distinguish sounds of different pitches. In vision, it helps the brain to more 

sharply distinguish borders of light and darkness (as in retina by horizontal cells); and in 

olfaction, it helps the brain to more clearly distinguish closely related odors . (Figure 1.32). 

30 



CHAPTER: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Frosynaptic 
irvhibiticomn 

Figure (1.32): Direct, indirect 
Diroct 
irhibition 

and Lateral inhibition 

Inhibitory 
iNntormowuror 

d.Reciprocal inhibition: 

o Itis a special type of lateral inhibition as in withdrawal and stretch reflex (Figure 1.33). 
e Inhibition of antagonist activity is initiated in the spindle in the agonist muscle. Impulses pass 

directly to the motor neurons supplying the same muscle and via branches to inhibitory 
interneurons that end on motor neurons of antagonist muscle. 

Sd 
Lr 
rl | ai 

EE Fi | @m 
Figure (1.33): Reciprocal inhibition 

E.Negative feedback inhibition: collateral from excitatory neuron stimulates an inhibitory 
interneuron (Renshaw cell ->glycine), which in turn back inhibits the same excitatory neuron 
(Figure 1.34). 

Figure (1.34): Negative feedback inhibition (Quoted from Ganong). 

31 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

F.Feedforward inhibition: an excitatory neuron stimulates an inhibitory interneurons which 

proceeds to inhibit the output neuron (Figure 1.35) e.g., in cerebellum, to limit the duration of 

excitation. 

In feed-forward inhibition, a principal cell and an interneuron receive excitatory inputs from the 

same presynaptic source. The interneuron then outputs its inhibitory signal to the principal cell. 

Thus, the principal cell receives 2 types of input, one excitatory and one inhibitory. 

A Feedforward inhibition 

Afferent neurons 
innervating 
axtansor muscles 

Extensors 
Inhibitory 

Afferant neurons intemeuron 
innarvating 
flexor muscles 

—— === Pu 

Flexor motor nauron Flaxors 

B Feedback inhibition 

Afferant neuron 
innervating Extensor 
axtensor musclas motor neuron 

=
{| Extensors 

Inhibitory 
intemeaurnon *[ ree + 

Figure (1.35): A- Feedforward inhibition, B-Feedback inhibition 

6-Occlusion: 

eo Occurrence of a smaller response when 2 near afferent neurons are maximally stimulated 

simultaneously than the algebric sum of the response obtained when each afferent is 

stimulated separately (Figure 1.36). 

o This is because some nerve cells are common in the discharge zones of both afferent 

neurons due to their overlap. 

32 



CHAPTER: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

a+b = 14 

(A) : occlusion 

Figure (1.36): Occlusion 

7-Subliminal fringe summation: 

o Occurrence of a greater response when 2 afferent neurons (not very close) are 
submaximally stimulated simultaneously than the algebric sum of the response obtained 
when each afferent is stimulated separately (Figure 1.37). 

e Stimulation of each afferent neuron separately only facilitates the nerve cells in the area of 
overlap, but however, if both are simultaneously stimulated, spatial summation of EPSPs 
leading to discharge of these nerve cells. 

(B) : Subliminal fringe 

Figure (1.37): Subliminal fringe facilitation 
8- Recruitment: 

o Recruitment is the gradual increase to a maximum in a reflex when a stimulus of 
unaltered intensity is prolonged. 

» There is progressive increase in the "background" activity of the interneurons, leading to 
an-increase in the excitability of more and more motor neurons, until spatial summation 
raises the excitability to the threshold value to discharge. 

33 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

CEREBRAL HEMISPHERE: SENSORY CORTEX 
(Please refer to the anatomy of the cerebral hemispheres in practical) 

The parietal lobe contains general sensory areas (Fig. 1.38): 

- 2 sensory areas: 1 somatosensory area (Sl) and 2"d somatosensory area (Sl). 

- 2 parietal lobules: the superior contains the sensory association area & the inferior is 

responsible for body orientation + contains the sensory speech area of Wernick. 

First Somatosensory area (Sl): 

e Site: Postcentral gyrus + post part of paracentral lobule (in Brodmann'’s areas 3, 1, and 

2) 

e Body representation: Representation of the body parts in 5-1 is: 

- Crossed: The body and face are mapped in the contralateral cortex. 

- Inverted: The face is represented in the lower half of the postcentral gyrus, while the 

foot, leg and the trunk in the upper half of the postcentral gyrus. 
- Disproportional to body area size but proportionate to number of receptors in body area: 

the lips and some other areas of the body are represented by large areas in the somatic 

cortex, whereas the trunk and lower part of the body are represented by relatively small 

areas. The sizes of these areas are directly proportional to the number of specialized 
sensory receptors in each area of the body. 

s Function: it receives sensory impulses from two nuclei of thalamus (Fast pain, Fine touch, 

Fine degrees of thermal sensations, Vibration, Stereognosis, Proprioception, Deep 

pressure). 
e Lesion: contralateral hemianesthesia = Impaired sensation on opposite side of body. 

Second somatosensory area (Sl): 

e Site: In the superior lip of post. ramus of lateral sulcus behind the central sulcus. 

e Representation: Poor localization is found in somatosensory area Il. Roughly, the face is 

represented anteriorly, the arms centrally, and the legs posteriorly. It receives sensory 
stimuli from both sides of the body. 

e Function: involved in recognizing hand-held objects by texture and size. 

e Lesion: lesions in S-ll produce deficits in learning by object manipulation and in 

recognizing the texture and size of hand-held objects. 

Taste (gustatory) area (Area 43): 

e Site: In the superior lip of post. ramus of lateral sulcus (parietal operculum) extending 
into the anterior part of insula. 

e Function: receives ipsilateral solitario-thalamo-cortical fibers via the thalamus. 

Superior Parietal Lobule & precuneus (Areas 5 & 7) (Somatosensory Association Area): 

e Function: It seems clear that the somatosensory association area collects and combines 

information arriving from multiple areas to understand its meaning. 

e Lesion—> astereognosis (inability to recognize familiar objects by touch) 

34 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Inferior Parietal Lobule: 
Site: in the supra marginal gyrus (Area 40) and the angular gyrus (Area 39). 
Function: They are parts of Wernicke’s area (sensory speech area) which is present only 
in the dominant hemisphere. Wernicke’s area includes also the posterior parts of sup. & 
middle temporal gyri i.e. Wernicke's area lies in parietal and temporal lobes. It is 
responsible for comprehension (understanding) of auditory and visual information. It 
selects suitable words & sends them via the arcuate fasciculus to the motor speech area 
of Broca to produce speech. 
Lesion-> Sensory (Receptive) Aphasia. The patient cannot understand spoken or written 
words thus speaks wrong words but fluently; in contrast to motor aphasia, the patient 
doés not feel that he/she has any problem. 
Note: three speech centers are known: 

Anterior (Broca’s) 
Posterior (Wernicke's) 
Superior (in supplementary motor area Mil in medial frontal gyrus). 

& 

¢. Homunculus 
| \ Area 

18& 
19 

b. Medial view 

Fig. 1.38 Functional areas 

35 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

AMINOACID METABOLISM AND HYPERAMMONEMIA 
(Sources of ammonia and removal of nitrogen from amino acids) 

Metabolism of ammonia 

Overview: 
Amino acid catabolism generates ammonia. Brain tissue is very sensitive to ammonia, 

Ammonia intoxication produces a comatose state. Cells get rid of excess ammonia by the 

reductive amination of a-ketoglutarate to form glutamate by glutamate dehydrogenase and 

the conversion of glutamate into glutamine by glutamine synthetase. Both of these enzymes 

are found in high concentrations in the brain. In the liver, ammonia is detoxified into urea 

through urea cycle. Urea is released into blood stream and cleared by the kidneys. Urea 
accounts for 90% of the nitrogen-containing compounds of urine. 

AMMONIA 
e Blood ammonia level is 5-35 pmol/l 
e Ammonia is toxic to the central nervous system and its accumulation in the body is 

fatal. 

e Once formed in the body, ammonia must be removed from blood. 

e itis removed by the liver that converts it to urea, which is less toxic, water soluble and 
easily excreted in the urine. 

Sources of ammonia: 
(1) Degradation of amino acids: 
a. Deamination of amino acids with formation of a-keto acids and ammonia. 
b. Transamination of most amino acids with a-ketoglutaric acid to form glutamic acid, 

which in turn is deaminated by glutamate dehydrogenase to form a-ketoglutarate and 

ammonia. 
(2) Ammonia is released during catabolism of monoamines (e.g. epinephrine, 

"norepinephrine and dopamine by the action of monoamine oxidase enzyme). 

(3) Ammonia is released during purine and pyrimidine catabolism. 
(4) In the intestine by intestinal bacterial flora through the action of urease on urea. 

AMINO ACIDS DEGRADATION 
Overview: 
Amino acids regardless of their sources, if not incorporated immediately into new proteins, 

are not stored but rapidly degraded. 
Phases of catabolism of amino acids: 
1) First phase: 
e The removal of the a-amino groups forming ammonia and the corresponding a-keto 

acids. 
e The most important route for disposal of ammonia is the synthesis of urea through urea 

cycle in the liver. The remaining portion of free ammonia is excreted in the urine. 
2) Second phase: 
e The carbon skeletons of the a-keto acids are converted to common intermediates of 

energy-producing metabolic pathways. 
e These compounds can be metabolized to glucose, ketone bodies, fatty acids, CO2 and 

water. 

36 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

REMOVAL OF NITROGEN FROM AMINO ACIDS 
Removing the a-amino group is an obligatory step in the catabolism of any amino acid and 
occurs through the following reactions: Deamination, transamination and transdeamination. 

|. Deamination 
Deamination is the removal of amino group from a-amino acid in the form of ammonia with 
the formation of a-keto acid. 

A. Oxidative deamination: 
It is catalyzed by one of the following enzymes: 
%* Glutamate dehydrogenase 4 
** L-amino acid oxidases 
% D-amino acid oxidases 

Glutamate dehydrogenase (Figure 1.39): 
e |tis present in high concentration in mitochondria of liver, heart, muscles and kidney. 
e It catalyzes the reversible oxidative deamination of glutamate to a-ketoglutarate 

and ammonia thus serving in both amino acid catabolism and synthesis. 
e |t requires NAD* or NADP" as coenzyme. NAD+ is used in in oxidative deamination and 

NADP+ in reductive amination. 

coor [coor coo" 
Hz NAD(P)* NAD(P)H Hz H,0 NH* dn, 
Hj H> hh A » Ha 

l Glutamate y Glutamate 
H—C—NH;* dehydrogenase ==NH; dehydrogenase =0 

Glutamate a-Iminoglutarate a-Ketoglutarate 

Figure (1.39): Reaction catalyzed by glutamate dehydrogenase enzyme 

Regulation of glutamate dehydrogenase (Figure 1.40): 
Glutamate dehydrogenase is an allosteric enzyme positively modulated by ADP, GDP 
and inhibited by ATP and NADH. 

Ea = ue pied 
Ey it = ITEAs 

Hc — Fis EADY CF I LAD (FD HL << -—o 

We Bw & swore ore pop id OE.— SOE SER un ErnTeae 

Figure (1.40): Regulation of glutamate dehydrogenase enzyme 

B. Non-oxidative deamination by glutaminase (Figure 1.41): 
The liver and kidneys generate ammonia from glutamine by the actions of glutaminase 
enzyme which catalyzes the hydrolysis of glutamine to glutamate. 

37 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

SR oo 
HN Clusamine 

glutaminase ~~ Ha 

~~ NHS ———> ——— Tres 

oO NHa 

“ey. & 
C—CHag—CHg— n—CO00™ 

-O 

Gluatarnmia 

Figure (1.41): Hydrolysis of glutamine by glutaminase 
In the kidneys, most of ammonia is excreted in the urine as NHg4* to regulate the acid base 

balance through the excretion of protons. 
In the liver, the ammonia is detoxified to urea. 

Il. Transamination 

-  Transamination is the transfer of an a-amino group from an a-amino acid to an a-keto acid 

forming a new amino acid and a new keto acid. 
-  Transamination reactions are catalyzed by transaminases (or aminotransferases) which 

occur in cytosol and mitochondria of all tissues especially liver. 
- Their coenzyme (PLP) is present at the catalytic site of aminotransferases. 
-  Transamination is reversible and functions both in amino acid synthesis and amino acid 

catabolism. 
Two transaminases are important in clinical diagnosis: 

(1) Serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase (SGOT) or aspartate aminotransferase 

i OH 

QO - 8 OH © : 

PIC == R08 o-6 _— & © 

2 0) TE aminotransfiorase “2 Fe 

Oe C “% (AST) Pe Ow C 

I» OH es La 

giviamaic oxaloacetate Dapartate t-ketoglutarate 

(2) Serum glutamic pyruvic transaminase (SGPT) or alanine aminotransferase (ALT) 

3 

TT 

"ia 
Ly alanine Ce — : 2 

“> ee -e. tramsarninoase Lvs o> yn 

L CALT) > | 
LS 

[| 

sluts rrmates Pw ruwoate silicamnilmes ee key fepglicrtaeroa tay 

e These enzymes are abundant in liver and heart and are released in serum as a part 

of cell injury which occurs in myocardial infarction and liver diseases as cirrhosis or 

infectious hepatitis. Assay of these enzymes in serum can be used both in diagnosis 

and in monitoring the progress of a patient during treatment. 

38 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

lll. Transdeamination 

e |tis a coupling of transamination and deamination. 
 Transamination collects amino groups from all amino acids in L-glutamate which 

undergoes oxidative deamination in the liver releasing ammonia. 
Arming acid a ke toglutertae 

Trensaminaasy 

MADE 

CRs? cori @ 
haklo ppersy se 

NE 

NADIE 

Fate of amino acids: 
According to the end product of the a-keto acids catabolism, amino acids are classified into: 
1. Glucogenic amino acids: They produce pyruvate, oxaloacetate or any intermediate in the 

citric acid cycle that can be used in gluconeogenesis. 
2. Ketogenic amino acids: They produce acetoacetate, acetyl CoA or acetoacetyl CoA which 

can be used in ketogenesis. These include leucine and lysine. 
3. Glucogenic and Ketogenic (mixed) amino acids: They can give both glucose and ketone 
bodies and include: tyrosine, phenylalanine, tryptophan, threonine and isoleucine. 
Fate of ammonia: 

1. Biosynthesis of urea is the main fate of ammonia. 
2 Biosynthesis of glutamic acid from ammonia and a-ketoglutaric acid by the action of 

glutamate dehydrogenase enzyme. 
Biosynthesis of nonessential amino acids. 
Biosynthesis of glutamine by glutamine synthetase enzyme. 
Small amounts of ammonia are excreted in urine. 

39 

alll 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

UREA CYCLE 
Causes of ammonia toxicity: 
Ammonia toxicity is due to: 
(1) Removal of excess ammonia involves reductive amination of a-ketoglutarate to 

glutamate and conversion of the latter to glutamine according to the following reaction: 

(Hr COOH GH CO-NH- 

(CH2)2 Glutamine swnthetase (CH2)2 

COOH ATP NH; H.O ADP COOH 

Ghitamate Glutamine 

The first reaction depletes cellular a-ketoglutarate required for ATP production. Glutamine 

formation depletes ATP. Therefore, toxic concentrations of NH3 interfere with ATP 
production required to maintain brain functions. 
(2) Depletion of glutamate via glutamine synthetase reaction results into depletion of its 
derivative GABA which is an inhibitory neurotransmitter in the brain. 
(3) Elevated levels of ammonia produce an increased permeability to K* and Ci-ions which 
could interfere with electrical activity in brain. 
4) Glutamine causes osmotic shift of water into cells resulting in cerebral edema. 

5) Excess glutamine is exchanged with Tryptophan a precursor for serotonin (Excitatory 
neurotransmitter). 

Urea Biosynthesis 
Overview: 
Ammonia is highly toxic to the central nervous system. It is converted to urea, which is 
much less toxic, water soluble and easily excreted in urine. 
The liver is the site of urea biosynthesis through urea cycle. 
Summary of urea cycle: 

1. Occurs in five steps: the first 2 steps occur in mitochondria and the last 3 steps occur 
in cytoplasm. 

2. Utilizes 3 ATP and 4 high energy bonds. 
3. Is catalyzed by five enzymes. 
4. Any defecti n one of these enzymes leads to ammonia intoxication. 

Transport of ammonia in the circulation: 
Ammonia is present at very low levelsi n the blood. Amino acid nitrogen is released from 
tissues in the form of glutamine or alanine: 

1) Ammonium ion (NH4*) 
2) Glutamine is transported to the liver where it is cleaved by glutaminase to produce 

glutamate and free ammonia. 
3) Alanine is transported to the liver where it is converted to pyruvate by 

transamination. The pyruvate is used to synthesize glucose which can enter the 
blood and be used by muscles {glucose-alanine cycle). 

40 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVQUS SYSTEM 

Steps of urea biosynthesis: 
1- Biosynthesis of carbamoyl phosphate 

+ This step occurs in mitochondria and needs CO., ammonia, phosphate and energy 
(CO; is a product of citric acid cycle, ammonia is derived from glutamate by 
deamination, the phosphate and energy are derived from ATP). 

* [tis catalyzed by carbamoyl phosphate synthetase-I. 
* N-acetyl glutamate acts as allosteric activator for carbamoyl phosphate synthetase- 

l. 

¥ 
Carbamoy] phosphate synthetase-I C=0 

ral TN, O=P—OH 

OH 
2ATP 2 ADP + P; 

Carbamoyl 
phosphate | ) 

2- Formation of citrulline 
This step occurs in mitochondria. 

» |tis catalyzed by ornithine transcarbamoylase enzyme. 

NH NH, T 
ii CH, Co NH 
Cm | Ornithine transcarbamoylase ! 
1 whe CH; N Shy 
o CH, TH2 

OOH HC — NH, CH, 

OH COOH P; Hn 11 
COOH 

Carbamovyl 
phosphate Ornithine Citrulline 

3- Formation of argininosuccinate 
* This step occurs in cytoplasm. 
* [tis catalyzed by agininosuccinate synthetase enzyme. 
* It utilizes one ATP and 2 high energy bonds. 

NH, NH COOH 

re CH— gh 
Bi NH CH, 
CH, coon Argininosuccinate synthetase CH, COOH 
1 | 
CH, +  HN— CH No =i oH, 

g 
The ha at AN H.0 $M: 
HE, Good AMP+ PP; HE —NH, 
COOH COOH 

| Citrulline Aspartic acid Argininosuccinic acid 

4- Cleavage of argininosuccinate 
* This step occurs in cytoplasm. 
* [tis catalyzed by argininosuccinate lyase enzyme. 
» Argininosuccinate is cleaved into arginine and fumarate. 

Fumarate produced is used to regenerate aspartic acid again. 

41 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

a EE 

- + 
| CH COO JNHo 

CHo — NH—C_ CH», —NH—C_ 
NH; CH,COO~ | NH, 

CH» CH» 

CH» CHon 

TH ~NH3 + TH ~NH3 

| SN | 
argininosuccinate fumarate arginine 

5- Cleavage of arginine 
* This step occurs in cytoplasm. 
» [tis catalyzed by arginase enzyme. 
« Arginine is cleaved to urea and ornithine. 

==SH Arginase CH» 

HO < = 

HG — NH NH COOH 
COOH 
Arginine Urea Ornithine 

Figure (1.42): Urea cycle 
Sources of urea nitrogen: 
- The first arises from Ammonia. 
- The second arises in cytosol from Aspartate. 

The energy cost of urea cycle: 
2 NH3+ CO2+ 3 ATP —= Urea + 2ADP + AMP + 2P+PP; 

So, although the urea formation requires the participation of 3 ATP molecules, yet it 
consumes 4 ATP from the energetic point of view as 4 high energy phosphate bonds are 
hydrolyzed” recall that conversion of ATP to AMP release PPi”. 

42 

mimim)—2—() 

FEET 

| 

hr-  
= 
bs 

\ 

hn. 
O=()m= 
| = 

MW 
2 
“5 
ba 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Regulation of urea cycle: 
1- Short term regulation: 
e Short-term regulation of urea cycle occurs principally at carbamoyl phosphate 

synthetase-l. 

e N-acetylglutamate is allosteric activator of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase-l. 
e N-acetylglutamate is synthesized from acetyl CoA and glutamate by N- 

acetylglutamate synthase enzyme. 
e Long term regulation: 

Enzymes of the urea cycle are controlled at the gene level with long-term changes in 
the quantity of dietary protein. 

¢ Long-term increase in the quantity of dietary proteins leads to a significant increase 
in the concentration of the enzymes of urea cycle. 

e On return to a balanced diet, urea cycle enzymes return to normal levels. 

Hyperammonemia 
Ammonia is highly toxic to the central nervous system. Accumulation of ammonia in the 
body leads to nervous manifestations and may be fatal. 
Causes of hyperammonemia: 
1-Acquired hyperammonemia: 
Due to liver diseases e.g liver cell failure, viral hepatitis, liver cirrhosis or hepatotoxins. 
2-Congenital hyperammonemia: 
It is due to deficiency of 
- Any enzyme of urea cycle 
- Membrane-associated ornithine transporter 
- N-acetyl glutamate synthase. 
Table 1.1 :Comparison between carbamoyl phosphate synthetase | and ornithine 
transcarbamoylase deficiencies 

CarbamoylilPhosplmate Synthetase Ori thine Transcarbamoylase 

T [NH,*];: hyperammonemia T [NH *);: hyperammonemia 

Blood glutamine is increased Blood glutamine is increased 

BUN is decreased BUN is decreased 

No orotic aciduria Orotic aciduria 
Autosomal recessive X-linked recessive 

Cerebral edema Cerebral edema 

Lethargy, convulsions, coma, death Lethargy. convulsions, coma, death 

- The two conditions can be distinguished by an increase in orotic acid and uracil, 
which occurs in ornithine transcarbamoylase deficiency, but not in the deficiency 
of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase. 

- Orotic acid and uracil are intermediates in pyrimidine synthesis. This pathway is stimulated 
by the accumulation of carbamoyl phosphate, the substrate for ornithine transcarbamoylase 
in the urea cycle and for aspartate transcarbamoylase in pyrimidine synthesis 

43 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Symptoms of ammonia intoxication: 
1. Mental retardation (hereditary type) 
2. Tremors 
3. Slurred speech 
4. Drowsiness 
5. Vomiting 
6. Cerebral edema 
7. Blurorf ivinsigon 
8. Coma 
9. Death 

Treatment: 
1) Restriction of dietary protein 
2) Increase carbohydrate diet to avoid proteolysis of muscle proteins 
3) Decrease nitrogenous load from GIT: 
- Antibiotics (e.g neomycin) to kill intestinal bacteria 

- Enema to eliminate intestinal bacteria 
- Lactulose: 
a. production of lactic acid (gut acidification) leading to increasing urease- deficient bacteria 

thus decreasing ammonia production and increasing the pH gradient which propels NH3 from 

blood to the lumen of the colon, while NH3 of the colon is converted into non-absorbable NH4’ 

ion 
b. A cathartic through increasing osmotic pressure thus reducing colonic bacterial load 

4) Phenylacetate: 
Phenylbutyrate is given orally and is converted to phenylacetate which condenses with ) 

glutamine 
5) L-ornithine-L-aspartate (LOLA, Hepa-Merz): 
Hepa-Merz is a combination of the amino acids ornithine and aspartate 

L-ornithine stimulates the urea cycle, with resulting loss of ammonia. 

Both L-ornithine and L-aspartate are substrates for glutamate transaminase. 

Resulting in increasing glutamate levels. 
Ammonia is subsequently utilized in the conversion of glutamate to glutamine by glutamine 

synthetase. 

BIOCHEMICAL BASIS OF SOME CNS RELATED DISORDERS 

1. Inborn errors of amino acids metabolism 
2. Vitamin deficiency 
3. Sphingolipidoses: Revisit 

1. INBORN ERROR OF AMINO ACID METABOLISM 

Ph i 
Tyrosine is a non-essential amino acid synthesized from phenylalanine according to the 

following reaction catalyzed by phenylalanine hydroxylase and using tetrahydrobiopterin 

(BH4) as a coenzyme: 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

OFX 

tetralhwdro dihvdro 
biopterin biopterin 

CH~ CH 

CH-NH3 CH—NH3 

COO COO" 
OO > HAO 

rhenvlalanine tyrosine 

Figure (1.43): Tyrosine synthesis 

Phenylketonuria is a metabolic disorder caused by either a deficiency of the enzyme 
phenylalanine hydroxylase or the enzymes that synthesize or regenerate the coenzyme 
tetrahydrobiopterin. | 
Biochemically, it is characterized by accumulation of phenylalanine and deficiency of tyrosine. 
BH4 is also required by tyrosine hydroxylase and tryptophan hydroxylase catalyzing reactions 
leading to synthesis of catecholamines and serotonin respectively. 

Characteristics: 

1- Mental retardation: due to deficiency of brain catecholamines and accumulation of toxic 
products in tissues. These toxic products (phenylpyruvate, phenyllactate and phenylacetataer)e 
derived from abnormal metabolism of phenylalanine. 

Fhhanylaftanmnine Cp Tissue proteins 

El — Ie | 

ha Tm Catecholarniness 

TT <p Fsarmarate 

Figure (1.44) : Abnormal metabolism of phenylalanine 

2- Depigmentation due to decreased melanin synthesis. 
3- Bad (mousey) odor of urine. 
Diagnosis: 
1- NBS by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) on dried blood spot that was 
withdrawn from the heel of the newborn to determine the concentration of 
phenylalanine and the ratio of phenylalanine to tyrosine (the ratio will be elevated in 
PKU) 
2- Measurement of phenylalanine blood level by ELISA 

45 

Vv 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Treatment: 
The earlier treatment is started, the more completely neurologic damage can be 

prevented. The goal of treatment is to keep plasma phenylalanine levels within the normal 

range through diet. 
a- Phenvylalanine-low diet 
b- Nutritional supplements: formulas containing tyrosine 

c- Enzyme substitute: metabolizes phenylalanine 
d- Tetrahydrobiopterin (BH4): oral supplementation 

r 

Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) results from partial or complete deficiency of the 

branched chain a-ketoacid dehydrogenase complex (BCKD) which catalyzes the 

oxidative decarboxylation step. 

Branched-chain Amino Acids Catabolism 

Leucine 
Valine 

Malpe syrup wine 
climmEna 

Acetoacetate Propl Tv CoA 

Acetyl CoA i 
Succinyl CoA 

Figure (1.45): Catabolism of branched chain amino acids 

The branched chain amino acids and their corresponding a-keto acids accumulate in blood 

causing a toxic effect that interferes with brain functions. 

Diagnosis: 
1. Newborn screening (NBS): 

a. Newborn screening (NBS) for MSUD is performed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS), on 

dried blood spot that was withdrawn from the heel of the newborn, using concentrations of 

leucine and isoleucine and the Fisher ratio (branched chain amino acids/phenylalanine and 

tyrosine) as diagnostic measures. 
b. Itis considered as part of NBS Program especially for babies at high risk and in areas where 

consanguineous marriage is common. 

2. Blood tests: Plasma amino acids testing should be performed to assess for elevated levels of 

branched chain amino acids and to detect L-alloisoleucine (derived from L-isoleucine) 

3, Genetic testing (prenatal diagnosis, confirmation of diagnosis, and genetic counselling of the parents) 

Characteristics: 

1. Neurologic problems that can result in coma (primarily due to the rise in leucine) 

2. Ketoacidosis 

3. Urine has a maple syrup- like odor due torise in isoleucine 

4. If treatment is delayed, intellectual disability results 

46 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Treatment: 
1. Life-long daily dietary management by restriction of dietary valine, leucine, and 

isoleucine 
2. Treatment of episodes of acute metabolic decompensation 
3. Some MSUD patients are responsive to thiamine treatment (Thiamine-responsive 

MSUD). 

2. VITAMIN DEFICIENCY 
Table (1.2): CNS diseases related to vitamin or coenzyme deficiency 

Vitamin or Enzyme Pathway Deficiency disease 
coenzyme 

Thiamine (B1) Pyruvate PDH *Wernicke-Korsakoff 
dehydrogenase 

[encephalitis & psychosis] 

a-Ketoglutarate 
TCA *Wet Beriberi 

dehydrogenase 

*Dry Beriberi [gradual Long 

nerve de f legs 
Transketolase Fve degeneration or eg 

then arms] 
HMP 

Branched chain 

ketoacid Metabolism of 
dehydrogenase valine, leucine 

and isoleucine 

Niacin (B3) Dehydrogenases Many *Pellagra [3 Ds] 

NAD (H) 

NADP (H) 

Folic acid Thymidylate synthase Thymidine *Homocystinemia 

(pyrimidine) | 
*Megaloblastic (macrocytic) 

Synthesis anemia 

: Purine *Deficiency in early pregnancy 

NEYIMEs I Purine synthesis causes Neural tube defects in 
synthesis need not to 

fetus 
be memorized 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

THF 

Cyanocobalam | Homocysteine methyl Methionine, *Pernicious anemia 

in (B12) transferase SAM, odd \ WI 
carbon fatty Megaloblastic {rrocrocytic) 

acid, Val, Met, Bema 

methylmalonyl-CoA lle, Thr *Progressive peripheral 

mutase neuropathy 

(1) Thiamin (Vitamin B1) 

Sources: 
1) Plant sources: yeast, bran, green vegetables, whole (unrefined) grains, nuts, legumes. 
2) Animal sources: organ meat (liver, heart, kidney), eggs, milk. 

Function of thiamine: 
It forms the coenzyme thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) by an ATP-dependent enzyme 
present in liver and brain. 
ERR Ta 

Thismise (vitamin B,) Thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) 
Figure (1.46): Formation of thiamine pyrophosphate from thiamine 

Reactions requiring TPP as a coenzyme: 
a. Oxidative decarboxylation of a-ketoacids, e.g. Pyruvate to Acetyl CoA and a- 

ketoglutarate to Succinyl CoA. 
b. Transketolase reaction, in pentose phosphate pathway (PPP) pathway. 
c. Decarboxylation of pyruvic acid in yeast (Pyruvate to Acetaldehyde). 

Thiamin deficiency: 
A clinical syndrome that arises insidiously as a result of a severe, prolonged deficiency of 
thiamine in the diet. The deficiency decreases activity of pyruvate and ketoglutarate 
dehydrogenases, resulting in decreased production of ATP and, thus, impaired cellular 

function particularly in tissues of the nervous system. 
1) Beriberi: is found in areas where polished rice is the major component of the diet. 
2) Wernicke-Korsakoff syndromes an acute deficiency of vitamin B1 seen mainly 

in alcoholics. 

48 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Biochemical detection of thiamine deficiency: The diagnosis of beriberi is assisted by a 
dietary history suggestive of a low thiamine intake and clinical manifestations. 
Objective biochemical tests of thiamine status are: 

1) Blood thiamine: Blood contains only about 0.8% of the total body thiamine, and the 
concentrations too low to allow precise extrapolation of the total thiamine status 
2) Measurement of erythrocyte transketolase activity (ETKA) 
3) The thiamine pyrophosphate effect (TPPE) 
4) Urinary thiamine levels 
5) Estimation of blood pyruvate and lactate levels 

Pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) deficiency: 

e Pyruvate dehydrogenase complex (PDC) converts pyruvate to acetyl-coenzyme A (acetyl 
CoA), which is one of the two essential substrates needed to produce citrate 

Glycolysis 

Alanine €— Pyruvate ¢———P Lactate 

NY — Fatty Acids 
Acetyl-CoA €— 

— Acetloacetate 

Oxaloacetate 
Citrate 

Nt 
Citric Acid Cycle 

Figure (1.47): PDH deficiency [The dashed line indicates the blocked pathway]. 

e Because pyruvate does not proceed to acetyl-coenzyme A (CoA), it is shunted to other 
pathways that produce lactic acid and alanine. 

® A deficiency in this enzymatic complex limits the production of citrate. 
e Because citrate is the first substrate in the citric acid cycle, the cycle cannot proceed. 
e Alternate metabolic pathways are stimulated in an attempt to produce acetyl-CoA; 

however, an energy deficit remains, especially in the CNS. 
Clinical picture: 

a. Lactic acidosis. 
b. The neurological form of pyruvate dehydrogenase deficiency contributes to hypotonia, 

poor feeding, lethargy and structural abnormalities in the brain. Patients may develop 
seizures and/or neuropathological spasms. These presentations of the disease usually 
progress to mental retardation, microcephaly, blindness and spasticity. 

Treatment: No proven treatment for PDH complex deficiency, however: 
1) Dietary restriction of carbohydrate may reduce symptoms. 
2} Correction of acidosis. 

45 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

(2) Vitamin B3 = Niacin (nicotinic acid) 
Structure: 

e Niacin (nicotinic acid) and nicotinamide (readily deaminated in the body to give niacin) 

are equally effective as a source of the vitamin in diet 

e Nicotinic acid is pyridine-3-carboxylic acid. 
e Niacin contains a pyridine ring 

SCOR, sp 

d 

Minolinamidgs 

i (Slim E 
EE 

L,.- 
MNicoiinia acid NALD 

Figure (1.48): Chemical structure of Niacin and related compounds 

Sources: 
1. From food: 

e Unrefined & enriched grains & cereal. 

o Milk. 
e [ean meats, especially liver. 
e Corn is low in both niacin & Tryptophan. 

2. From Tryptophan: Niacin is not a true vitamin in the strictest definition since it can be 

derived from the amino acid tryptophan. However, only 1 mg of niacin can be 

synthesized from 60 mg of tryptophan. Vitamin B6 is required in this process 

Tryptophane Foul so fp sme Niacin Nicotinamide 

Nicotinic acid Nicotinamide 

mononucleotide mononucleotide 

Nicotinic acid Nicotinamide 
dinucleotide —® dinucleotide 

(NAD) 

Figure (1.49): Sources of vitamin B3 

50 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Importance of niacin: 

¢ Nicotinamide is responsible for the synthesis of two coenzymes: Nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide (NAD*) and Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide phosphate (NADP+) 

e NAD*&NADP* functions as coenzymes for numerous dehydrogenases in oxidation- 
reduction reactions. They act as one electron and one hydrogen atom carriers. 

e Nicotinic acid is used therapeutically for lowering plasma cholesterol and TAGs levels 
(niacin strongly inhibits lipolysis in adipose tissue leading to decrease in circulating FFAs). 

Deficiency of Niacin Results in Pellagra 
Pellagra is a disease involving the skin, gastrointestinal tract, and CNS. The symptoms of 
pellagra progress through the three Ds: 

1) Dermatitis: inflamed, red and rough skin. 
2) Diarrhea, with other GIT manifestations. 
3) Dementia, demyelization and CNS symptoms. 

If untreated, Pellagra goes to death. 
Causes: 

1. A diet poor in both tryptophan and niacin e.g. corn (maize). 
2. Defective absorption: Hartnup’s disease in which tryptophan absorption is impaired. 
3. Pyridoxal-phosphate (Vitamin B6) deficiency: as vitamin B6 is needed for niacin synthesis 

from tryptophan. 
4. Carcinoid tumor (60% of tryptophan is converted into serotonin leading to decrease 

production of nicotinic acid. 

Treatment: 

1- Treatment of the cause. 
2- Nicotinic acid supplement. 

(3) FOLIC ACID (FOLACIN, VITAMIN B9) 
There are many reasons for studying folic acid and one carbon unit metabolism and also the 
intimate relation between folic acid and vitamin B12. Both vitamins have fundamental roles 
in CNS function at all ages, especially the methionine-synthase mediated conversion of 
homocysteine to methionine, which is essential for nucleotide synthesis. Also, they have roles 
in the prevention of disorders of CNS development, mood disorders, and dementias. 

Folic acid 

Folic acid or folate consists of the base pteridine attached to one molecule of each p- 
aminobenzoic acid (PABA), and glutamic acid. 

H,N N N y COOH 
= a pS 

) a O (CH2)2 
N a 5 0 10 {i 

N CH—/N C —N-—CH 

OH H H 
COOH 

by ——J  Na a > 

Pteridine PABA Glutamate 

Figure (1.50): Structure of folic acid 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Animals are not capable of synthesizing PABA or attaching glutamate to pteridine. Therefore, 

folic acid must be supplied in diet. Liver, yeast and green leafy vegetables are the major 

sources of folic acid. 

Activationof  folic acid into tetrahvarofolate: 

Folate Reductase 

Folate (F) a — » Dihydrofolate (DHF). 

NADPH +H" NADP 

NADPH "+H" 

Dihydrofolate Reductase 

NADP 

Tetrahydrofolate (THF). 

Folate analogues: 

e Sulfa drugs inhibit synthesis of folic acid in bacteria (antibiotics). 

Para-Aminobenzoic Acid + Pteridine 

Dihydropteroate Synthetase 

Dihydropteroic Acid 

Dihydrofolate Synthetase 

Dihydrofolic Acid 

Figure (1.51): Inhibition of folic acid synthesis by Sulfa drugs 

e Trimethoprim (antimicrobial) and methotrexate (anticancer chemotherapeutic agents) 
are inhibitors of dihydrofolate reductase. 

Dihydrofolic Acid 

Dihydrofolate Reductase | Trimethoprim 

Tetrahydrofolic Acid 

| 
Thymidine 
Purines 

4 
DNA 

Figure (1.52): Inhibition of dihydrofolate reductase by trimethoprim and methotrexate 

52 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Metabolic role; 
The biologically active form is the tetrahydrofolate. It is the carrier of activated one carbon 
units that are essential for the synthesis of choline, serine, glycine, methionine and purines. 

ONE CARBON UNIT METABLISM 

Definition: 
It is the transfer of a single carbon unit from a donor to an acceptor. 
Some synthetic pathways require the addition of single-carbon groups that exist in a variety 
of oxidation states: 

* Formyl (oxidized form) 
* Metheny 

Methylene 
* Methyl (Most reduced form) 

These single carbon groups can be transferred from carrier compounds as THF & SAM to y 
specific structures that are being synthesized or modified. 
Table 1.3 Different forms of one carbon groups 

One carbon groups carried by tetrahydrofolate 

Oxidation state Group 

Most reduced - CH3 Methyl 

(= methanol) 

Intrmediate -CH;- Methylene 

(= formaldehyde) 

Most oxidized -CHO Formyl 

(= Formic) -CHNH Formimino 

-CH= Methenyl 

One carbon unit can be carried & transferred by: 
» Tetrahydrofolate (THF) 
» S-adenosyl methionine (SAM) 

N.B.: CO; carried by biotin is not one C unit because human can’t reduce CO; 
* Tetrahydrofolate (THF) carries the above-mentioned units of lower oxidation level. 
* These units are linked at: 

* Nor 
« Nor 
* both of THF 

* They undergo interconversion by NAD-dehydrogenase or NADP-reductase. 



CHAPTER | OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Folate derivatives 

LTE sen — 
HN 

tetrahycdrofol ate S5-Methvl S8-Formimino 
tetrahydrofolate tetrahydrofolate 

10-Formwvl 6,10-Methviene 8,10-Methenyl 
tetrahydrofolate tetrahydrofolate tetrahydrofolate 

Figure (1.53): Different folate derivatives 
ources & Fate of arbon Uni 

l Methylene Group (- CH» ): 
e Sources: 

1. PB -—carbon of Serine: 

Ser Hydroxy methyl transferase 

Serine €———=———" Glyoine 

THE N° N* MethyleTnHeF 
2. Glycine 

Glycine cleavage enzyme 

Glycine + THF — I; +(0; + N NY Methylene THF 

NAD NADH+H 

Thymidylate synthetase 
dUMP N » TMP 

N>N * Methylene THF DHF 
1. Synthesis of Thymidylate 
2, Oxidized to methenyl THF (= CH) 
3. Reduced to methyl THF {CH3) 

54 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

I. Methenyl Group (=CH): 
e Sources: 

1. Histidine => figlu => 5-formimino THF = 5,10-Methenyl THF 
2. Oxidation of methylene THF (N° N° -CH; THF) catalyzed by NADP 

dehydrogenase. 

* Fate: 
1. Hydrolyzed to form N° formyl THF 

ll. Formyl group: 
e Sources: 

1. Formic acid 

Formyl THF synthetase 

pn 1 10 
THF + HCOOH ofl TN "N° formyl THF 

AT p ADP +P, 

2. Hydrolysis of methenyl THF (=CH) 

3. Tryptophan catabolism 

Tryptophan => Formyl kyneurenine Va » Kyneurenine 

THF N- formyl THF 

e Fate of Formyl group: Synthesis of C2, C8 in purines 

Aspartate | Glycine 
rf 

Glutamine 

10-Formyl-THF 
Figure (1.54): Role of formyl group in purine synthesis 

IV. Methyl THF 

e Source: By reduction of methylene THF catalyzed by methylene THF reductase 
(NAD linked); the reaction is irreversible. 

o Fate: Vit. Bi; Coenz. accept CHs to form methyl cobalamin; then transfer it to 
homocysteine to form methionine. 

55 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Methyl Trap: 
Deficiency of Vitamin B12 may lead to a so-called "methyl-trap” of THF, in which THF is 

converted to a reservoir of methyl-THF which thereafter has no way of being 
metabolized, and serves as a sink of THF that causes a subsequent deficiency in folate. 

SH H,C —S 

(CH), (CH, 
H— GC — NH H— C — NH 

I doo 

Homocysteine Methionine 
METH ICONINE IASE 

Methylcobalamin 

Methyl — H , folate Biz H, folate 

Figure (1.55): Role of vitamin B12 in one carbon metabolism 

Table 1.4: Sources and fates of different one carbon groups: 

1. Ecaonolgerhie Seris 1. S 
converted to Gly (and | THF (=CH). 
THE is  convertedto 3. Recuoed methyTHlF  (CH). 

y. Gly.a  oxidized by the 
Gly cleavage system 

Metheny! group Histidine = figiu > S- 1. Hydrolyzedto form Ne formyl THF 
formimino THF <> 5,10- 
Methenyl THF 
Oxidation of methylene 
THF (NS N* -CH. THF) 
catalyzed by NADP 
dehydrogenase. 

Formyl group Activation of free formate Synthoef sC2i, CsB  in purine 
by ATP 

fr. Asralsi of mpnany? 

3 TE ophoncatabolm 

Methyl 1. Irreversible reduction of Vi. B,; Coenz. accept CH; to form 
methyleTnHeF by methylene methyl cobalamine; then transfer itto 
THF reductase (NAD linked) homocysteine to form methionine. 

56 



CHAPTER I: OVERVIEW OF THE NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Sources and fates of one-carbon 
substituted folates 

Serine 

Glycine <==) Methylene-THF wml Methyl-THF > Methionine 

TMP + DHF 

% 
DNA 

Histidine > Formimino-THF > Methenyl-THF 

] » Formyl-methionine 

CO; 

Figure (1.56): Interconversion between different one carbon groups 

(4) Cyanocobalamin (Vitamin B12): Revisit blood module for details. 

57 



1 ¥31dVHD 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs): 

By the end of this chapter the student should be able to: 

Describe different types of sensory receptors and correlate to function of 
each receptor. 

Describe mechanisms of sensory adaptation. 
Identify gray matter nuclei and corresponding laminae in different spinal 
cord segments. 
Describe pain and crude touch pathways. 
Recognize different sensations carried by spinothalamic tract. 
Discuss the anterolateral system (beginning, course, lamination and 
termination). 
Describe the pathway of pain from the head. 
Compare between different types of pain. 
Clarify mechanisms of referred pain. 
Describe different mechanisms of pain modulation. 
Classify opioid drugs. 
Clarify mechanisms of action, adverse effects and interactions of opioid. 
Describe pathways of proprioception and fine touch of the body. 
Discuss the beginning, location, course, lamination and termination of the 
gracile and cuneate tracts. 
Discuss the beginning, location, course and termination of the 
spinocerebellar tracts, spino-olivary and cuneo-cerebellar tracts. 

59 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Histological Structure of Receptors 

The nerve endings 

Nerve endings are the structures representing the site of contact between a non -nervous 
tissue and the terminal end of peripheral nerve fiber. They are classified into two main groups. 

. Receptors: These are present at the termination of the afferent (sensory) fibers. 
1 Effectors: These are present at the termination of efferent (motor) fibers. They transmit 
motor impulses to muscles or secretory impulses to glands. 

|. Receptors: (Fig. 2.1). 

Classification: 

Receptors can be classified into three main groups according to their distribution in 

body: exteroceptors, proprioceptors and interoceptors. 

thermo- Meissner's nociceptor pacinian 
receptor corpuscile senses pain corpuscle 
senses heat senses “touch” senses “pressure” 

or cold 

Fig.2.1: Different types of receptors 

1- Exteroceptors: 
Site: on the external body surface which receive stimuli from outside the body. 
They include: 

a) Cutaneous receptors that receive touch, pressure, pain and thermal 
sensations. 

b) Receptors for special sensation as smell, taste, sight and hearing. 
2- Proprioceptors: 

Site: They are present in: 

- Joints capsules, fascia and ligaments. 

- Skeletal muscles as muscle spindle. 

- Tendons as Golgi tendon organ. 

eo They transmit sense of movement and position (kinesthesis). 

e They receive stimuli from the deep parts of the body. 

60



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

3-Interoceptors or Visceroceptors: 

Site: They are found in the internal viscera as the gastrointestinal tract, respiratory, 
cardiovascular, and urogenital systems. 

-They receive sensory impulses concerned with visceral pain, hunger, thirst, spasm, 
sexual feelings, bladder fullness and sense of malaise or wellbeing 

Exteroceptors (Cutaneous Receptors) 
Table 2.1: Cutaneous receptors are classified into the following: 

Unencapsulated Receptors Encapsulated Receptors 

1. Free nerve endings 1. Meissner’s corpuscles. 
2. Peritrichial nerve endings 2. Pacinian corpuscles. 

3. Merkel’s tactile disc 3. Ruffini corpuscles. 

4. Krause's end bulbs. 

A- Unencapsulated Receptors 

1- Free Nerve Endings (Fig.2.2): 
Site: They are widely distributed in the 

Epidermal 
epidermis of the skin, cornea, mucous cells 

membranes, serous membranes, 

muscles and deep fascia. 

Fig.2.2: Free nerve endings 

Microscopic structure: 

oIn the skin, the afferent nerve fibers arise from the subepidermal plexus of nerves, and 
lose their myelin and neurilemmal sheaths. 

eThe naked nerve fibers penetrate the epidermis and run between the epidermal cells 
where they terminate by small swellings (knobs). In the cornea, they reach to the 
superficial layers. 

Function: They respond to noxious (painful), crude touch and thermal stimuli. 

61 



CHAPTER il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

2- Peritrichial nerve endings: (Plexus of Bounet): 

(Fig 2.3) = capes cell 
Site: They are found around the hair follicles so, they are has ws 

called hair follicle receptors. ot g hk 

Microscopic structure: t 2 os 

e The afferent nerve fibers arise from the sub- 
epidermal plexus of nerves and lose their sheaths. 

e The naked fibers form a basket-like arborization ny. FA 

around the connective tissue sheath of the hair Nerve fiber x 7 EEX) :, 

follicle, just below the sebaceous gland. / - 
Function: Peritrichial nerve endings respond to Fig.2.3: Peritrichial nerve ending 
displacement of hairs, so they are mechanoreceptors. 

3- Merkel’s tactile disc: (Fig.2.4) 
Site: 

1) In the deep layers of the epidermis of the palmer surfaces of hands and planter 

surfaces of feet. 

2) At the transitional sites between hairy and non-hairy skin. 

Microscopic structure: 

e The free nerve ending in this receptor is related to a modified epidermal cell 

called Merkel’s cell. 

e Merkel’s cells: 
Site: they are found between the basal cells of the epidermis. 

L.M.: Each cell has a lobulated nucleus and cytoplasmic secretory granules close 

to the disc. 

E.M.: Merkel’s cells have cytoplasmic projections that extend between the 

keratinocytes, to which they are joined by desmosomes. 

e The afferent nerve fiber loses its myelin and Schwann cell sheaths It expands into 

a concave terminal disc known as tactile meniscus which is closely applied to 

Merkel’s cell. 

Function: They are mechanoreceptors. They discharge continuously during sustained 

vertical pressure e.g. holding a pen. 

62 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Epidermal 
==& 

Merkel’s cell | 

Tactile meniscus 

Nerve fiber | 

Fig.2.4: Merkel’s tactile disc 

B-Encapsulated Receptors 

1- Meissner's corpuscles: (Fig.2.5) 
Eo Tem 

Site: They are present in the dermal papillae of skin of Login. = 

palms, fingertips, soles, lips, nipples, eyelids and 
external genitalia i.e. mainly in non-hairy (glabrous) 4 Epldermis 

skin. 

Microscopic structure: 

| J Meissner’s 
The corpuscles are ovoid in shape, with average size ; corpuscle 

a » - Ll wid [7] > . 

100x 50 pm. The corpuscles lie in the dermal papilla yr Fir Nora 
, wy 

with ia 
 its long axis p Jd 

erpendi ' 
cular to the sur ud 

face. A orsokis re 
Each corpuscle is surrounded by a thin connective Fig.2.5: Melissner's corpuscle 
tissue capsule. It is formed of transversely arranged 
stacks of flattened modified Schwann cells (Teloglia). 
The unmyelinated afferent fibers (two or more) 
enter the base of the corpuscle. They branch and run in a spiral course in between the 
flattened Schwann cells. Their branches terminate by expanded ends or knabs. 
Function: Meissner's corpuscles respond to crude touch and two points tactile 
discrimination. They are mechanoreceptors. 

63 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

2- Pacinian corpuscles: (Fig.2.6) 

Sites: They are found in: 

¢ The dermis and hypodermis. 

e The pancreas, mesentery, breasts, external genitalia and wall of urinary bladder. 

e The periosteum, tendons and joint capsules 

Microscopic structure: 

e Pacinian corpuscles are large ovoid 

structures, 1-4 mm. X 0.5-1 mm. 

e The corpuscle is supplied by a 

myelinated afferent nerve fiber 

which loses its myelin sheath at the first node of Ranvier just inside the corpuscle. The 

afferent fiber runs axially to terminate by a club- 

like termination in the opposite pole of the Pig2/6:Pacinian sorpustle 

corpuscle. 

e The afferent fiber is surrounded by numerous concentric layers of flattened modified 

Schwann cells (Teloglia) forming the core of the corpuscle. 

The cells are arranged in two cores: 

a) An inner core: The cells are small, thin and closely packed together with very 

narrow intercellular spaces. They form semicircles around the afferent fibers. 

b) An outer core: The cells are large, thick and widely separated. They form complete 

concentric layers around the inner part of the core. 

e The number of the concentric lamellae or layers forming the core of the Pacinian 

corpuscles varies from few layers in small corpuscles to 70 layers in large ones. 

surrounded by connective tissue capsules. 

e Thereis a narrow subcapsular space containing amorphous ground substance, collagen 

fibers, fibroblasts and some macrophages. 

Function: They respond to deep pressure and vibration. They are mechanoreceptors. 

64 



CHAPTER Ii: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

3- Ruffini corpuscles: (Fig.2.7) 
Site: They are present in the dermis and subcutaneous tissues. They are more numerous in 

the planter surfaces of feet and palmer surfaces of hands. 
Microscopic structure: 

e [tis an elongated fusiform structure. Each is surrounded by a thin connective tissue 
capsule and has a core of bundles of collagenous fibers. 

* It receives a myelinated afferent nerve which loses its myelin sheath, and branches 
repeatedly to form diffuse arborizations which end by 
flattened terminals between the collagenous bundles of the 
central core. 

Function: 

They respond to tension in the collagenous fibers of the 
surrounding connective tissue. They are mechanoreceptors. 

4- Krause's end bulbs: (Mucocutaneous corpuscles Fig. 2.7: Ruffini corpuscle 

Site: They are present in the conjunctiva, tongue, mouth and external genitalia, where 
they are known as genital corpuscles. 

Microscopic structure: They are two types: 

1) Small corpuscles: receives a single non-myelinated afferent fiber. 
2) Large corpuscles: receives one or more myelinated afferent fibers which lose their 

myelin sheath and form a network of non-myelinated endings. 

Function: They are mechanoreceptors. 

Proprioceptors 
Types of receptors: 

1) Pacinian corpuscles. 

2) Muscle spindle. (stretch receptor). Discussed later 

3) Golgi tendon organ. (stretch receptor). Discussed later 
4) Unencapsulated receptors (diffused free nerve endings), which are found in joint 

capsules, ligaments and periosteum. 

65 



CHAPTER Il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Joint receptors: 

a) Golgi tendon organs are found in internal and external ligaments. 

b) Diffuse free nerve endings, Ruffini corpuscles and Pacinian corpuscles are found in 

the capsule. 

¢) Pacinian corpuscles are located in the synovial membranes. 

These together with muscle spindles, play an important role in kinesthesia. 

Effectors (Fig. 2.8) 

These are termination of peripheral motor nerve fibers in the effector organs. They are 

classified into 

1- Somatic effectors that supply the skeletal muscles fibers (Motor end plate). 

2- Visceral effectors that supply cardiac muscle, smooth muscle and glands. They include: 

a) Motor fibers: 

These supply cardiac muscle and smooth muscle fibers 

b) Secretory fibers: 

Plexuses surrounding the acini of the glands or tubules give similar nerve terminals, 

which pass between the cells and end upon the plasma membrane of glandular cells. 

Autonomic nervous system 

Fig. 2.8: Effectors 

66 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

SENSORY RECEPTORS AND SENSORY CODING 
The sensory receptors 

Definition 
They are specialized structures located at the peripheral ends of sensory (afferent) 
neurons, which respond to various stimuli and translate them into nerve. 

Functions of sensory receptors: 
1-Detectors: They detect the stimuli (changes in the environment). 
2-Transducers: They transform these stimuli into action potential, which leads to 
generation of nerve impulses in the sensory nerve. 
3-Generators: Generate action potentials in the afferent nerves and inform the CNS 
about the change in the external and internal environment. 

Properties of receptors: 
1- Specificity: 

oe Muller's Law: each type of receptors respond to detect a particular form of 
energy (adequate stimulus) at a much lower threshold than other receptors (i.e. 
retinal receptors respond to light). Receptors can also respond to other non specific 
stimuli but at much higher threshold (i.e. retinal receptors respond mechanically). 

2- Excitability: 

o The receptors have the ability to 
convert energy into action potential 
in the sensory nerves. 

e When the receptor is stimulated by 
an adequate stimulus, it generates a 
depolarizing potential called receptor 
or generator potential. The 
amplitude of the generator potential 
is related to the intensity of the 
stimulus, the higher the generator 
potential, an action potential is 
produced in the sensory nerve. Fig.2.9a: The receptor (generator) 

potential (Quoted from Fox) 

3- Discharge of impulse: 
o Weber Fechner Law: the frequency of discharge from receptors is directly 

proportional to the logarithm of intensity of applied stimuli (1000 fold increase in 
the intensity increase only 3 fold the frequency (compression function of 
receptors). 

4- Adaptation: 
e This is decline in the frequency of discharge of action potential from receptors 

that occurs on maintained stimulation by a constant strength. 

67 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Mechanism (not due to fatigue): 

1) Gradual closure of Na+ channels. 
2) Gradual decrease excitability of 1% node of Rapitly atzpting 

anvier. | | uActiton a | JH| E | A 1 

3) Loss of stimulus energy in the surrounding —_ 
tissues by constant stimulation. stradius | a 

4) Accomodation of afferent nerve to SHeasiy Tone 

generator potential, due to progressive 
inactivation of sodium channels in the nerve 
fiber membane. Siowly adapting 

5) Readjustment & remodeling of receptor aston | {Qi lll lliLl 
itself (the fluid within the corpuscle rapidly rr : pe 

redistributes after applying a distorting force ah | 

and receptor potential is no longer elicited). ~~ Inlensily si — 

Fig. 2.9b: Tonic and phasic receptors 
(Quoted from Guyton) 

Coding of Sensory Information 

This is the ability of nervous tissue to discriminate the modality (type), locality and 

intensity of various sensations. 
_1-Modality discrimination: 

Each of the principal types of sensation that we can experience—pain, touch, 

sight, sound, and so forth —is called a modality of sensation. 

Muller's Doctrine Law: stimulation of a certain sensory pathway, no matter how or 

where (starting from receptors till the termination at higher centers) produces 

sensation for which receptors are specialized; labeled line principle. i.e. retinal 

stimulation both mechanically and by light resulting in light sensation. 

2-Locality discrimination: 

& Law of Projection: when the sensory pathway is stimulated anywhere along its 

course, the evoked sensation at the higher centers is projected to the location of its 

receptors (i.e. phantom limb). One explanation for phantom limbs is that the nerves 

remaining in the stump can grow into nodules called neuromas, and these may generate 

nerve impulses that are transmitted to the brain and interpreted as arising from the 

missing limb. 
Lateral inhibition: helps the CNS to localize exactly the location of a stimulus. 

Fig. 2.10: Localization of 
ES icim 

es Arco of | stimulus by lateral inhibition 
rE cay PD Ior activision 

ig EY { encitaton 

irevibitic rs 

Ares OF 
may ry Sia tices 

68 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

3-Intensity discrimination depends on: 
» Weber Fechner law, frequency of discharge from a receptor in afferent pathway is 

proportional to log intensity of the stimulus. 
es Number of activated receptors. Strong stimulus activates more receptors (i.e. 
recruitment). 
Duration of perception: depends on the ability of the receptor to adapt either rapidly 

or slow. 
Classification of sensory receptors: 

1) Classification by location (Discussed previously). 
2) Classification by type of stimulus detected (functional classification): 

« Mechanoreceptors: respond to physical force such as pressure (touch or blood 
pressure) and stretch. 

» Photoreceptors (electromagnetic): respond to light. 
e Thermoreceptors: respond to temperature changes. 
o Chemoreceptors: respond to dissolved chemicals such as taste and smell and 

respiratory chemoreceptors. 
» Nociceptors (pain receptors): respond to different stimuli associated with tissue 

damage. 
3) Classification according to adaptation of receptors: 

Rapidly adapting (phasic) receptors: rapidly decrease discharge of impulses after 
application of a stimulus, such as touch receptors. 

» Moderately adapting receptors: such as thermoreceptors. 
Slowly adapting (tonic) receptors: slowly or never decrease discharge of impulses 
after application of a stimulus, such as pain receptors. 

69 



CHAPTER Ii: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

SPINAL CORD INTERNAL STRUCTURE 
GRAY MATTER 

e The spinal cord has two enlargements; cervical and lumbar, which are associated with the 

large nerve roots innervating the extremities. 

e Spinal nerves (Fig. 2.11): There are 31 pairs of spinal nerves. On this basis, the spinal cord 

is divided into 8 cervical, 12 thoracic, 5 lumbar, 5 sacral and one coccygeal segment. These 

spinal nerves are attached to the spinal cord by two roots: 

1) Dorsal (posterior) root: it is purely sensory (afferent) fiber. 
2) Ventral (anterior) root: it is purely motor (efferent) fiber. 

Arrangement of dorsal fibers entering the spinal cord: 

e The nerve cells in the dorsal root ganglion are pseudounipolar nerve cells of variable size. 

They have two processes: 
a) Peripheral processes (dendrites), which are connected to receptors. 

b) Central processes (axons), which pass to approach the dorsal surface of the spinal cord. 
The nerve fibers form medial and lateral bundles. 

As the root fibers enter the spinal cord, they bifurcate into: 
a} Long ascending fibers that form the long tracts. 

b) Short descending fibers, which form short intersegmental tracts. 

Dorsal horn— Afferent neurone, cell body ——— 

Lateral horn— White matter 

Dorsal root of spinal nerve — Central canal — Dorsal root ganglion 

Va 
—— Spinal nerve 

Ventral root of spinal nerve —— Efferent neurone, cell body 

Grey matter Ventral horn 

Fig. 2.11 The spinal nerve 

70 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

General topography of the spinal cord: 
The spinal cord is formed of two symmetrical halves which are separated posteriorly by the 
posterior median septum. They are separated anteriorly by the anterior median fissure. The 
two halves are connected in the central part by the gray and white commissures. The outer 
surface of the spinal cord shows fissures and sulci (Fig. 2.12). 

Posterior median 

Posterior intermediate 
‘OY sulandc seuptusm. 

. ry Posterior lateral 
/ J a sulcus 

| 

Posterior horonf 7 
the gray matter 

= 
Anterior horn of Ys 
the gray matter = 

Anterior lsterel 
sulcus 

Fig. 2.12: Topography of the spinal cord 

e Transverse section of the spinal cord shows that it is formed of an inner core of gray matter 
surrounded by an outer covering of white matter. 

The gray matter (Fig. 2.13) 
The gray matter is an H-shaped structure, it consists of: 

1) Two posterior horns extending almost to the surface. 

2) Two anterior horns extending anteriorly but they do not reach the surface. 
3) Two lateral horns, near the base of the anterior horn. They are found in thoracic and 

upper lumbar segments only. 
4) Gray commissure contains the central canal which is lined by ependymal cells. 

Histological structure of the gray matter (Fig. 2.13): 
e The gray matter of the spinal cord is formed of: 

1) The nerve cells and their processes, neuroglia and blood capillaries. The nerve cells 
are multipolar and of various sizes and shapes. 

2) The nerve fibers (portions of axons) in the gray matter are mostly unmyelinated. 
* The nerve cells in the posterior horn and intermediate gray are of two types: 

1) Golgi type I: includes the celis with long axons that form long ascending tracts. 
2) Golgi type lI: these are cells with short axons that terminate in the gray matter near 

their origin. 

e The nerve cells in the gray matter are arranged in groups (Nuclei). 

71 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Nuclei of Posterior Horn {Sensory nuclei): 

1) Posteromarginal nucleus: 

This nucleus forms a thin layer of large cells covering the tip of the posterior horn. 

2) Substantia Gelatinosa: 

This nucleus forms a cap-like portion of the apex of the posterior horn. 

3) The main sensory nucleus (Nucleus proprius): 

The nucleus is poorly defined and situated anterior to the substantia gelatinosa (in the 

head of the posterior horn). 
4) Reticular nucleus: 

The nucleus is present {ateral to the nucleus proprius. 
5) Dorsal nucleus of Clarke: 

This column is present in the medial part of the base of the posterior horn. 

6) Intermedio-medial nucleus: 

It is present in the medial part of the intermediate gray, lateral to the central canal. It 

serves as intermediate relay in the transmission of visceral afferent impulses to the 

visceral efferent neurons. 
7) Posterior and anterior commissural nuclei: 

These two nuclei are found in the posterior and anterior gray commissures respectively. 

Their axons form intersegmental tracts in the posterior and anterior white columns. 

N.B.: All sensory nuclei of the posterior horn are found in all levels of spinal cord, except 

Clarke’s nucleus which extends from the 8th cervical segment to the 3rd lumbar segment 

(C8-L3). 
Nerve cell groups in the anterior horn {Motor nuclei): 

e Cells of the anterior horn are somatic efferent neurons, and their axons pass in the 

anterior roots of the spinal nerves to innervate skeletal muscles. 

e They are classified into two types: 

1) Large alpha neurons: they are numerous. Their axons innervate the extrafusal 

skeletal muscle fibers. 

2) Small gamma neurons: Their axons innervate the contractile parts of intrafusal 

muscle fibers of muscle spindles. 

e The nerve cells of the anterior horn are classified into 3 groups, the medial, the central 

and the lateral nuclear groups. 

I- The medial nuclear group: This group is subdivided into: 

a) Antro-medial nucleus, that extends in all levels of the spinal cord. 

b) Postero-medial nucleus, which is smaller. It is more prominent in the cervical and 

lumbar segments. 

These two nuclei of the medial nuclear group innervate the skeletal muscles of the 

neck and back (muscles attached to axial skeleton). 

72 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Il- The central nuclear group: It is present in the cervical and lumbar segments. In 
the cervical segments they include: 
- Phrenic nucleus which innervates the diaphragm. 
- Accessory nucleus which forms the spinal part of the accessory cranial nerve. 

Ii- The lateral nuclear group: 
In the cervical and lumbar segments this group is formed of 3 groups of 

a) Antro-lateral nucleus. 

b) Postero-lateral nucleus. 
c) Retropostero-lateral nucleus. 

* In general, the most medial muscles are supplied by the most medial nuclei, while the 
most distal muscles are supplied by the most lateral nuclei. 

* The hand is supplied by retropostero-lateral column of cervical segments and the foot by 
the same column of lumbar segments. 

» Flexor muscles are innervated by nerve cells in the dorsal region of the cell columns and 
extensor muscles by nerve cells in their ventral region. 

* In thoracic segments, this group forms a small single column innervating the intercostals 
and trunk muscles. 

Nerve cell groups in the lateral horn: 

The intermedio-lateral nucleus: 
This nuclear column extends from the first thoracic segment to the second or third lumbar 
segments. The cells give rise to preganglionic sympathetic fibers. 

N.B.: The sacral autonomic nuclei: 
A similar group of cells is located along the lateral surface of the anterior gray horn in the 
second, third and fourth sacral segments. They give rise to preganglionic parasympathetic 
fibers. 

Cytoarchitectural lamination of the spinal cord: (Fig. 2.14) 

Examination of thick spinal cord sections 80-100um stained with cresyl violet revealed the 
cytoarchitectural organization of the neurons of gray matter into laminae. 
A Lamina is a region with similar characteristic properties as regards the size, shape, packing, 
density and cytological features of their neurons. 
Lamina I: It corresponds to the posteromarginal nucleus. 
Lamina Hl: It corresponds to substantia gelatinosa. 
Lamina Il and IV: They correspond to the main sensory nucleus. 
Lamina V: It extends across the neck of the posterior horn. It is divided into medial and lateral 
parts in all segments except the thoracic segments. Its lateral part corresponds to the reticular 
nucleus. 
Lamina VI: A broad lamina extending across the base of the posterior horn. It is divided into 
medial and lateral parts. 

73 



CHAPTER Il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Lamina Vil: This lamina forms a large area. It includes Clarke’s nucleus, intermedio-medial 

and intermediolateral nuclei. 
Lamina VIII: It includes the medial part of the anterior horn cells. It receives termination of 
extrapyramidal tracts. 
Lamina IX: It corresponds to the nuclear groups of anterior horn. 
Lamina X: It represents the central gray substance surrounding the central canal. 

Substantia gelatinosa 
_ Lamina | 

Posteromarginal nu. .__ Nucleus proprius 2 

id nu. Led Lamina Ii 

ATO ee) Lamina I 
AT Lamina IV 

intermediomedial nu. 
| - LaminaV 

Intermediolateral nu. oe oq Lamina VI 
Retrodorsolateral nu. ~~ Lamina Vil 

| Lamina 
Dorsolateral nu. 

Vill — N 

Dorsomedial 
nucleus 

Ventrolateral nu. 
| Ventromedial nu. Da

Accessory arkrly kly 8 shaded area
P s
h  
renic nu. in this region form 

Lamina IX 

Fig. 2.14: Nuclei and Lamination of the gray matter of the spinal cord 

74 



CHAPTER Il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

ASCENDING TRACTS 

There are two sensory pathways in the body: 
1. The Exteroceptive pathway (anterolateral system): occupies the anterior and lateral 

columns of the spinal cord. Carries superficial (cutaneous) sensations i.e, pain, 
temperature & crude touch. 

2. The Proprioceptive pathway: includes the dorsal column of the spinal cord which carry 
conscious proprioception (deep sensations) & fine touch in addition to other tracts 
carrying unconscious proprioception. 

Generally, the spinothalamic and the dorsal column pathways are formed of three neurons. : 
1. First-order neuron is always a pseudounipolar cell in the Dorsal Root Ganglion. It carries 

sensation by its peripheral process from receptors & conveys this sensation by its central 
processes via the dorsal root to the spinal cord. 

2. Second-order neuron is always a cell in the CNS (spinal cord or medulla oblongata). Its 
axon always decussates to the opposite side and ascends in the brainstem as lemniscus 
to end in the thalamus. 

3. Third-order neuron is always a cell in the Ventral Postero-Lateral Nucleus of Thalamus 
(VPLN). Its axon passes through posterior limb of internal capsule, then through corona 
radiata to reach sensory area of cerebral cortex. 

THE ANTEROLATERAL SYSTEM 

The anterolateral system includes all long ascending tracts in the anterolateral columns of 
the spinal cord These tracts include the: 

1. Lateral spinothalamic tract which carries pain & temperature 
2. Ventral spinothalamic tract which carries crude touch 
3. Spinotectal tract 
4. Spinoreticular tract 

Pathway for Pain & Temperature from the Body (Fig. 2.15) 

First Neuron: Dorsal root ganglion cells (pseudounipolar) 
Their peripheral processes carry pain & temperature sensations from the receptors (free 
nerve endings in skin) & are 2 types: 

1. Ab fibers carry fast pain 
2. C fibers carry slow pain 

Their central processes enter the spinal cord via the dorsal root and divide into ascending 
& descending branches for few segments. These fibers run in the dorsolateral (Lissauer’s) 
tract which lies over the apex of the dorsal horn. They end on neurons in the dorsal horn 
of grey matter of the spinal cord: 
e Fast pain ends mainly on Lamina | (beside other laminae) 
e Slow pain ends on Substantia Gelatinosa of Rolandi (SGR) 

75 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Second Neuron: Neurons in the previously 
mentioned laminae of dorsal horn. 
Their axons of cross to the opposite side in 
the ventral commissure & ascend as two 
spinothalamic tracts in the anterolateral 
white columns: 
1. The neospinothalamic tract (previously 

called lateral spinothalamic): Carries the 
fast, discriminative component of pain. 
Its fibers are laminated so that cervical 
fibers are most medially and sacral 
fibers most laterally. The tract ascends 
in the brain stem as the spinal 
lemniscus. It reaches the thalamus 
where it ends on VPLN of thalamus. 

2. The paleospinothalamic tract: Carries 
the affective-motivational component 
of pain. Axons of SGR cross and ascend A 
in the spinoreticular tract, make 
collaterals with the reticular formation 
of brainstem & continue to ascend to 
relay on the intralaminar nucleus of 
thalamus. 

Third Neuron: 
e Discriminative component: Axons of Laminael, IV-VIII 

VPLN of thalamus pass in posterior limb Fig. 2.15: Spinothalamic tract 
of internal capsule, then through corona 
radiata to reach sensory area in the postcentral gyrus of cerebral cortex. 

o Affective component: Axons of the intralaminar nucleus of thalamus ascend to the 
anterior part of the cingulate cortex (part of the limbic system, responsible for emotions). 

Path f Pain & Temperaturef TheF 

It is carried by the trigeminal nerve. 
1. First Neuron lies in is Trigeminal Ganglion (formed of pseudounipolar cells as DRG). These 

neurons have two processes: 
- Peripheral processes: carry pain from the skin of the face along the three divisions of 

the trigeminal nerve (ophthalmic, maxillary & mandibular). 
- Central processes: join to form the sensory root of the trigeminal nerve. They enter 

the pons to end on the spinal nucleus of the trigeminal. 
2. Second Neuron in the Spinal Nucleus of Trigeminal. Its axons cross to opposite side 

forming the trigeminal lemniscus which ascends to end on the ventral posteromedial 
nucleus (VPMN) of thalamus. 

3. Third Neuron in the VPMN of thalamus. Its axons pass in internal capsule, then the corona 
radiata to reach sensory area of face in the lower part of the postcentral gyrus of the 
cerebral cortex. 

76 

——————— 

i 

] OU 1 
Sa mr apn Be en a ow 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Pathw fCr T Pr re (Fig. 2.16) 

First Neuron: Dorsal root ganglion cells 
Peripheral processes of these cells carry touch & Sensory 
pressure from the receptors & their central processes 
enter the spinal cord via the dorsal root to end on 
neurons in several laminae of the grey matter of spinal 
cord mainly nucleus proprius. 

Second Neuron: Neurons of nucleus proprius. 
Their axons cross in the ventral white commissure to 
reach the opposite ventral white column & ascend as 
the ventral spinothalamic tract. Cervical fibers lie most 
medially while sacral fibers most laterally. 
In the brainstem, it joins the medial lemniscus & ends on 
the VPLN of thalamus. 

Third neuron: VPLN of thalamus 
Axons of VPLN of thalamus pass in posterior limb of 
internal capsule then through the corona radiata to 
reach the sensory area of the cerebral cortex. A 

Nucleus proprius 

Fig. 2.16: Crude touch pathway 

Notes: (Read only) 
e Not all spinothalamic fibers end on VPLN of thalamus, 

some fibers end on intralaminar nuclei and midline nuclei. These fibers are probably 
involved in arousal behavior. 

e Clinically, it is generally accepted that 50% of crude touch ascends via the contralateral 
ventral spinothalamic tract & the other 50% via the ipsilateral dorsal column tracts. 
Therefore, injury of the spinal cord can hardly cause any loss of crude touch sensation. 

77 

|] L] 

[| EPL JR 



CHAPTER Ik: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Other Ascending Tracts belonging to the Anterolateral System: 

SpinoretiTrcacut;l (aFirg. 2.17) 
e Second order neuron fibers ascend in the 

lateral & ventral white columns where it is 
intermingled with the spino-thalamic tracts. 

e Most fibers cross to the opposite side & 
ascend to end on neurons of the ponto- 
medullary reticular formation. 

e A spino-reticulo—thalamo-cortical pathway 
was suggested as a route for slow, duil- 

formation 
aching, affective component of pain 
sensation. 

Fig. 2.17: Spinoreticular tract 

Spinotectal Tract: (Fig. 2.18) 
eo Most of second order neuron fibers cross to the 

opposite side & ascend in the lateral white 
column to end in the superior colliculi of the 
midbrain. 

e The spino-tectal tract is concerned with spino- 
visual reflexes (head turning towards source of 
pain stimulus). 

Fig. 2.18: Spinotectal tract 

78 



CHAPTER Ii: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

SENSATIONS CARRIED BY SPINOTHALAMIC TRACT 

Sensation and perception are two separate processes that are very closely related. 
v' Sensation is information about the environment obtained by sensory receptors. 
v' Perception is the process by which the brain selects, organizes, and interprets these 

sensations. 

Fig. 2.19: Sensation and Sensation Perception 
(raw data is processed {sensHions are 

perception Uye vs odh ols Sreiissd in 
skin, tongue) 

Brain 
Information 

(leght, sound, eic 

Occipital tobes of 
the bram recewe 

—— Lightwaves e—— — SONSHIY (ROIMIGLION 
room the eye and 
Process if Jas a free” 

= Sensory unit is defined as a single sensory axon and all its peripheral branches that 
vary in number. 

* The receptive field of a sensory unit is the spatial distribution (area) from which a 
stimulus produces a response in that unit. It differs from one area to another allover 
the body. 

" Generally, the areas supplied by one unit overlap and interdigitate with the areas 
supplied by others. 

Receptors and Receptien ve FiTt elds Pinaysny LThe y 
IN snr fen. 

The recepive fields 
of tree primary 
SEES0NY AEUrons 
ly. 

Fig. 2.20 a: Receptive field Fig. 2.20 b: Receptive field of the 
3 primary sensory neurons. 

79 



CHAPTER il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

» A dermatome is an area of skin that sends information to the brain via a single spinal 

nerve. 

Fig. 2.21: 
Dermatomes 

Sensation includes the following types: 
1) Somatic sensations: arising from skin and deeper structures e.g. skeletal muscles, 
tendons, ligaments, joints and periosteum. 

2) Visceral sensations: mediated by autonomic afferent fibers and include sensations from 

the viscera. 
3) Organic sensations e.g.: thirst and hunger. 
4) Special sensations e.g.: vision, hearing, taste and smell. 
5) Emotional sensations: as fear, sadness, pleasure etc. 

Table (2.2): Classification of Somatic Sensations accordintog  the site 
Superficial Deep Combined 

(exteroceptives) 

a-Pain. a-Propioceptive sensations. a-Stereognosis. 

b-Temperature. b-Pressure sense. b-Vibration. 
c-Touch c-Muscle tension sense. 

d-Muscle sense 

Table (2.3): Classification of Somatic Sensations accordintgo the modality 

Mechanoreceptive Thermoreceptive Nociceptive 

a-Tactile (crude, fine). 
b-Vibration. 
c-Pressure. 
d-Tickle, itch. 
e- Propioceptors. 

80 

“of tf fetes) ba ge 14 a 



CHAPTER Il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Table (2.4): Classification of sensation according to localization (higher center) 
Cortical sensations Thalamic sensations 

(Fine) (Crude) 
Sharply localized fine sensations Not sharply localized crude sensations 
- Fast pain - Slow pain 
- Fine touch - Crude touch 
- Fine degrees of thermal sensations - Wide degrees of thermal sensations 
- Vibration 
- Stereognosis 
- Proprioception 
- Deep pressure 

Table (2.5): Classification of sensation according to their ascending sensory pathway 
Spinothalamic sensations Dorsal column sensations 

- pain - Fine touch 
- Crude touch - Vibration 
- thermal sensations - Stereognosis 
- Itch & tickle - Proprioception 
- Sexual sensations - Deep pressure 

The Spinothalamic pathway (anterolateral system (ALS): 
The ALS transmits nociceptive (pain), thermal, and nondiscriminatory (crude) touch 
information to higher brain centers by a sequence of three order neurons. 
The neuron sequence: Refer to anatomy lecture. 

Spinothalamic sensations: 
- Crude touch. 
- Thermal sensations. 
- It& tcickhle. 
- Pain 
- Sexual sensations. 

1) Crude touch sensation (light touch) 
Crude touch is a non-discriminatory, not sharply localized type of touch 
Definition: the ability of the body to detect contact with objects. 
Receptors: 
- Name: free nerve endings {F.N.E.) and hair end organs. 
- Type: mechanoreceptors. 
- Mechanism of stimulation: mechanical displacement or deformity of receptors . 
Afferent neuron type: Ad and C types of fibers. 
Ascending sensory pathway: ventral spinothalamic pathway. 
Higher nervous perception site: thalamus. 

Adaptation: rapid adaptation. 

How to examine: cotton wool test. 

81 



CHAPTER Il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

2) Thermal sensations 
Definition: the ability of the body to feel different degrees of hot and cold sensations. 
Receptors: 
- Name: F.N.E. for hot (warm) sensations, F.N.E. and Krause end bulb for cold 

sensation. 
- Type: Thermoreceptors. 
- Mechanism of stimulation: 

e Changes in the concentration of metabolites in thermoreceptors that activate or 
inactivate ion channels. 

e The excess change in temperature (above 43°C) activates membrane receptors 
that mediates pain sensation (thermal nociceptors). 

- Range of stimulation of thermoreceptors : 
v' Cold receptors: 10-43 °C, maximal at ~ 25 °C 
v’ Hot receptors: 30-50 °C, maximal at ~ 45 °C 
v’ Less than 15 °C: cold pain 
v' More than 45 °C: hot pain 
v' 30-35 °C: indifferent sensation (detected by both and it is near body 

temperature). 

Zsening Cold Cool Indiffer- Warm Hot Burning 
ent hot 

o~&.  Warmth 
E a hd Vvecsplors 

& 
oy * - 
® Cold-pain ’ . Heat-pain 
Qa. s ' 

R )
nZy.

 
  * 
a 2- | 
E Ye pe ’ 

5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 55 60 
Temperature (°C) 

Fig. 2.22: Range of stimulation of thermoreceptors 
- Distribution of thermoreceptors: 

v' Thermoreceptors are found in spots, not in the form of separate receptors. 
v' Cold spots are more numerous than hot spots by ~ 3-10 times. 
v' Thermoreceptors are more numerous in lips (~20/ Cm?2), than hands (~5/ Cm?) 

than trunk (~2/ Cm?2). 
Afferent neuron type: C for warm sensations, Ab and C for cold sensation. 
Ascending sensory pathway: lateral spinothalamic tract. 
Higher nervous perception site: Thalamus and sensory cortex. 
The thalamus detects wide (crude) changes in temperature, while the cortex detects 
fine temperature changes. 

82 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Adaptation: moderate, but hot receptors are relatively rapidly adapting than cold 
receptors. 

How to examine: Two test tube test. 

Paradoxical cold sensation: 

A sensation of cold that occurs at the onset of exposure to hot temperature. e.g. a hot 
shower gives a sensation of coldness in the first second 
v' Explanations: Rise of temperature above 40°C leads to sudden and rapid discharge 

of impulses from cold receptors (may be to its damage). 
3) Itch & tickle 

Definition: 
v' Tickle: local repeated mechanical stimulation of cutaneous receptors by light 

moving objects. 
v" Itch: sensation of irritation caused by chemicals (histamine and kinins), that may 

lead to scratch reflex. 
Receptors: 
- Name: F.N.E. 
Afferent neuron type: C type of afferents. 
Ascending sensory pathway: ventral division of antero-lateral system 
Higher nervous perception site: Thalamus 

4) Pain Sensation 
Definition; 

Protective sensation caused by unpleasant sensation caused by noxious stimulation. It occurs 
whenever any tissues are being damaged, and it causes the individual to react to remove the pain 
stimulus . 
Pain Receptors and Their Stimulation 

Pain Receptors are Free Nerve Endings. The pain receptors in the skin and other tissues are 
all free nerve endings. Three Types of Stimuli Excite Pain Receptors—Mechanical, Thermal, and 
Chemical. Pain can be elicited by multiple types of stimuli. They are classified as mechanical, 
thermal, and chemical pain stimuli. 

Pain producing substances during Tissue Damage: Extracts from damaged tissue cause intense 
pain when injected beneath the normal skin. One chemical that seems to be more painful than 
others is bradykinin. Also, the intensity of the pain felt correlates with the local increase in 
potassium ion concentration or the increase in proteolytic enzymes that directly attack the nerve 
endings and excite pain by making the nerve membranes more permeable to ions. 

Tissue Ischemia as a Cause of Pain: When blood flow to a tissue is blocked, the tissue often 
becomes very painful within a few minutes. The greater the rate of metabolism of the tissue, the 
more rapidly the pain appears. One of the suggested causes of pain during ischemia is accumulation 
of large amounts of lactic acid in the tissues (anaerobic metabolism). It is also probable that other 
chemical agents, such as bradykinin and proteolytic enzymes, are formed in the tissues because of 
cell damage. Therefore, even such simple activities as sitting for a long time on the ischia can cause 
tissue destruction because of lack of blood flow to the skin where it is compressed by the weight of 
the body, and so the person normally shifts weight subconsciously. 

83 



CHAPTER Il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Muscle Spasm as a Cause of Pain Muscle spasm is also a common cause of pain, this probably 
results partially from the direct effect of muscle spasm in stimulating mechanosensitive pain 
receptors, but it might also result from the indirect effect of muscle spasm to compress the 
blood vessels and cause ischemia. 
Characters of pain: 
e |[t initiates protective withdrawal mechanism (e.g., withdrawal reflexes). 
e Itis widely distributed (especially skin). 
¢ Its adequate stimulus is non specific (mechanical, thermal, chemical; provided causing tissue 
damage). 
e It requires high threshold. 
e Non adapting. 
e [tis perceived at both cortical & thalamic levels. 

Pain and pain control system 1 
What are the types of pain: 
1-Cutaneous: fast & slow pain. 
2-Deep: slow pain. 
3-Visceral: slow pain. 
What are the viscera which gives rise to fast pain (Ad): 
1-Pleura (parietal). 
2-Pericardium (parietal). 
3-Peritoneum (parietal). 
4-Synovial membrane ofj oints. 

1- Cutaneous Pain 
Characters 
= Fast pricking pain. 
% Slow diffuse pain 
% Not referred. 
Table (2.6): Comparison between fast & slow pain 

Fast Slow 
Characters Immediate, acute, sharp Chronic, burning, throbbing. 
Felt 0.1 sec 1 sec 
Site Skin Skin & deep tissue & viscera 
Afferent AS C 
Receptors FNE FNE 
Pathway Neospinothalamic Paleospinothalamic 
Perception Mainly cortex Mainly RF, non specific thalamic 

nuclei. 
Blocked Hypoxia & pressure. Local anaesthesia. 
Reflexes Somatic protective reflexes. | Autonomic & somatic reflexes 
Summation Does not occur Marked & intolerable 
Neurotransmitter Glutamate Substance P 

How to test: Pin prick test 
Neospinothalamic Tract for Fast Pain (Fig. 2.23): 
v' The fast type AS pain fibers transmit mainly mechanical and acute thermal pain. They 

84 



CHAPTER li: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

terminate mainly in lamina | (lamina marginalis) of the dorsal horns, and there they 
excite second-order neurons of the neospinothalamic tract. 

v' These second-order neurons give rise to long fibers that cross immediately to the 
opposite side of the spinal cord through the anterior commissure and then turn 
upward, passing to the brain in the anterolateral columns. 

v' Afew fibers of the neospinothalamic tract terminate in the reticular areas of the brain 
stem, but most pass all the way to the thalamus. A few fibers also terminate in the 
posterior nuclear group of the thalamus. 

v' From these thalamic areas, the signals are transmitted to other areas of the brain, as 
well as to the somatosensory cortex. 

Paleospinothalamic Pathway for Transmitting Slow Pain (Fig. 2.19): 
The paleospinothalamic pathway transmits pain mainly from the type C pain fibers. 
v" In this pathway, the peripheral fibers terminate in the spinal cord almost in laminae 

It and Ili of the dorsal horns, which together are called the substantia gelatinosa. Most 
of the signals then pass through short fiber neurons within the dorsal horns 
themselves. 

v' Then, the last interneuron give rise to long axons that mostly join the fibers from the 
fast pain pathway, passing to the opposite side of the spinal cord, then upward to the 
brain in the anterolateral pathway. 

v' The paleospinothalamic pathway terminates widely in the brain stem. Only a small 
fraction of fibers passes all the way to the thalamus. Most of neurons terminate in 
one of three areas: 

(1) The reticular nuclei of the brain stem. 
(2) The tectal area of the midbrain. 
(3) The periaqueductal gray region surrounding the aqueduct of Sylvius. 

v" From the brain stem, multiple short-fiber neurons relay the pain signals upward into 
the intralaminar and ventrolateral nuclei of the thalamus and into certain areas of 
the hypothalamus and other brain areas. 

To: Somatosensory areas 

Intralaminar 
nuclei 

Ventmobasal 
complex and 

postenor 
nuciear 

group [Siow" Pairs 
“Fast” Pain Fibers 

Fibers 
Reticular 
formation 

Fig. 2.23: Transmission of pain signals into the brain stem, thalamus, and cerebral cortex 
(Quoted from Guyton) 

85 



CHAPTER Il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Deep Pain 
it originates from muscles, joints, periosteum. 

It is slow pain. 
Diffuse, dull aching. 
Associated with parasympathetic. 
It initiates reflex contraction of nearby muscles. 
It may be referred. 
Causes: 

» Trauma to deep structures. 
» Bone fracture. 
» Arthritis. 
>» Severe muscle spasm (tetany). 
» Muscle ischemia. 

e A certain muscle metabolite known as Lewis P factor (probably K+ ions) = pain. i.e. angina 
pectoris, intermittent claudication. 

Muscle Pain 
If a muscle contracts rhythmically in the presence of an adequate blood supply, pain does not | 

usually result. However, if the blood supply to a muscle is occluded, contraction soon causes | 

pain. The pain persists after the contraction until blood flow is reestablished. These | 

observations are interpreted in terms of the release during contraction of a chemical agent 

(Lewis’s “P factor”) that causes pain when its local concentration is high enough. When the 
| blood supply is restored, the material is washed out or metabolized. 
The identity of the P factor is not settled, but it could be K+. Clinically, the substernal pain that | 

develops when the myocardium becomes ischemic during exertion (angina pectoris). Angina is | 
relieved by rest because this decreases the myocardial 02 requirement and permits the blood | 
supply to remove the factor. | 

| Intermittent claudication, the pain produced in the leg muscles of persons with occlusive 

vascular disease, is another example. It characteristically comes on while the patient is walking 
and disappears on stopping. 

Visceral Pain 
e There are few pain receptors in viscera (i.e. cutting intestine with knife rarely causes significant 
pain). 
¢ Inflammed viscus => severe pain {1ry hyperalgesia). 
e Some viscera are pain insensitive: 
» Liver parenchyma. 
» Lung alveoli. 
» Visceral layer of peritoneum. 
» Visceral layer of pleura. 
» Visceral layer of pericardium. 

eo Characteristics: 
» Slow pain. 
» Diffuse (poorly localized), dull aching and may be spasmodic colic. 
» Often referred to skin, causes 2ry hyperalgesia. 
e Associated with sweating, nausea, vomiting accompanied by parasympathetic effects 

86 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

(bradycardia, hypotension) = sickening pain. 
e Causes somatic reflexes (i.e. contraction of abdominal muscles = guarding rigidity). 

eo Causes: 
» Visceral ischemia (bradykinin release and proteolytic enzymes). 
» Mechanical (overdistension of a hollow viscus can collapse blood vessels causing ischemic 

pain, traction on mesentery, spasm of viscera). 
» Chemical (perforated peptic ulcer, the juice causes widespread digestion of visceral 

peritoneum). 

Effects of painful stimuli 
Table (2.7) : Different responses to painful stimuli 

Somatic Autonomic Emotional Effects Hyperalgesia 
reflexes Effects 

Fast pain -> | Mild pain = } i.e. crying, anxiety | This is pathological 
protective sympathetic. (+ of limbic | hypersensitivity to pain 
withdrawal R. | Severe pain = | system). accompanies skin injuries & 

parasympathetic inflammation, burns, over- 
exposure to sun rays. 

Table (2.8): Comparison between 1ry & secondary hyperalgesia 
Primary Secondary 

Site At site ofi njury (flare) In healthy skin area around the 
| injury. 

Threshold Low (non-painful becomes | Normal or high. 
painful. 

Mechanism It is due to sensitization of | Convergence facilitation theory: 
pain receptors by substance P | afferent fibers from the area of 
and inflammatory mediators | 2ry hyperalgesia converge on the 
released by local axon reflex | facilitated neurons, thus the pain 
and damaged tissues. aroused at this area become 

exaggerated. 

87 



CHAPTER Ii: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

To thalamus 

- Fo a = - 

LR 

Fig. 2.24a: Inflammatory soup 

Ee _—n — —_— EE — — ee w 
: T - -_—r - = 

_ . n 
a 3 ; 4 

« Antidromic or Axon Reflex: 

Viseera (heart) 

Fig. 2.24 c: Convergence facilitation 
theory 

Some Clinical Abnormalities of Pain : 
1-Hyperalgesia: Discussed before. 
2-Herpes Zoster (Shingles) 

Occasionally herpesvirus infects a dorsal root ganglion. This causes severe pain in the 

dermatomal segment subserved by the ganglion, thus eliciting a segmental type of pain that circles 

halfway around the body. The disease is called herpes zoster, or “shingles,” because of a skin 

eruption that often ensues. 
The cause of the pain is presumably infection of the pain neuronal cells in the dorsal root 

ganglion by the virus. In addition to causing pain, the virus causes a rash that vesiculates within a 

few days and then crusts over within another few days, all of this occurring within the dermatomal 

area served by the infected dorsal root. 
3-Tic Douloureux 
Lancinating pain occasionally occurs in some people over one side of the face in the sensory 

distribution area (or part of the area) of the fifth or ninth nerves; this phenomenon is called 

tic douloureux (or trigeminal neuralgia, or glossopharyngeal neuralgia). The pain feels like 

sudden electrical shocks, and it may appear for only a few seconds at a time or may be almost 

continuous. 

88 



CHAPTER il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Often it is set off by exceedingly sensitive trigger areas on the surface of the face, in the 
mouth, or inside the throat—almost always by a mechanoreceptive stimulus rather than a 
pain stimulus. For instance, when the patient swallows a bolus of food, as the food touches a 
tonsil, it might set off a severe lancinating pain in the mandibular portion of the fifth nerve. 
The pain of tic douloureux can usually be blocked by surgically cutting the peripheral nerve 
from the hypersensitive area. This operation leaves the side of the face anesthetic, which in 
itself may be annoying. 

Fig. 2.25 a: Fig. 2.25 b: 
Shingles or Herpes Zoster Trigeminal neuralgia 

Pain and pain control system 2 
Referred (Radiating) Pain 

Definition 
Often a person feels pain in a part of the body that is fairly remote from the tissue causing the 

pain. This is called referred pain. For instance, pain in one of the visceral organs often is referred to 
an area on the body surface. 

Mechanism of Referred Pain Branches of visceral pain fibers are shown to synapse in the spinal cord 
on the same second-order neurons that receive pain signals from the skin. When the visceral pain 
fibers are stimulated, pain signals from the viscera are conducted through at least some of the same 
neurons that conduct pain signals from the skin, and the person has the feeling that the sensations 
originate in the skin itself. 
4% It is most frequent in visceral pain, and deep somatic pain. 
= [tis referred to an area of the skin that has same embryonic segment. 
+ e.g. 
1-Pain of cholecystitis -> referred to tip of right shoulder. 
2-Cardiac pain - referred to left shoulder and inner side of left arm. 
3-Pain of kidneys -> referred to testicular region. 
4-Gastric pain = referred to umbilical region. 
5-Teeth pain = referred to other teeth. 
6-Headache. 

89 



CHAPTER Il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Liver and Liver and 
gallbladder Lung and, gallbladder 
3 —7 

Small 
intestine 

Urinary 
Ureter bladder 

Fig. 2.26 a: Referred pain 

Mechanism: 
1- Convergence Projection theory 

e The afferent neurons from both somatic structure and viscera that develop from the same 

embryonic segment converge on the same neurons of subthalamic nucleus (STT), 

e The brain is used to receive somatic stimuli only, so it is almost unaware of viscera. 

e Thus, upon stimulation of diseased viscus, the brain projects it to the corresponding 

somatic structure i.e., wrongly percieves pain as if it comes from this corresponding somatic 

structure. 

2- Convergence Facilitation theory 
e In substantia gelatinosa of Rolandi (SGR), the neurons receiving pain from skin area are 

facilitated by afferent from the viscous. So pain is felt in the skin due to activation of its pathway 

from SGR to the cortex. 

To thalamus and 

Fig. 2.26 b: Fig. 2.26¢: 

Convergence Projection theory Convergence Facilitation theory 

90 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Headache 
Headaches are a type of pain referred to the surface of the head from deep head 

structures. Some headaches result from pain stimuli arising inside the cranium, but others 
result from pain arising outside the cranium, such as from the nasal sinuses. 
Table (2.9) : Causes of headache 

Extracranial (90-95%) Intracranial (5-10%) 
1-Glaucoma, hypermetropia (tonic 1-Meningitis (severe type), brain Tumour, 
contraction of ciliary muscle) leads to retro- Alcohol (toxic to miningitis). 
orbital Headache. 2-Decrease CSF (20 ml, especially in erect) 
2-Sinusitis leads to retro-orbital, forehead, causes stretch of dural spaces, VD of blood 
face Headache. vessels. 
3-Emotions causes spasm of head muscles 3-Fevers, hypertension (increase in pressure on 
(psychogenic) headache. the wall of blood vessels, migraine cause 
4-Otitis media & externa. distention of intracranial arteries. 
5-Tooth disorders 

Cerebral vault Brain stem and 
headaches = cerebellar vault TYPES OF HEADACHE 
J headaches 

MIGRAINE CLUSTER 

SINUS HYPERTENSION TJ 
HEADACHE HEADACHE HEADACHE 

Fig. 2.26d: Types of headache 

| Table (2. 10): The intracranial pain sensitive structures 

The intracranial pain sensitive structures 
| 1-Venous sinuses. 

ll 2-Dural vessels. 
ii3-Dura at base of brain. 
4-Tentorium cerebelli. 

The brain tissue is itself i nsensitive. 
Bay iear m—A —re 

91 



CHAPTER Il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Migraine Headache. Migraine headache is a special type of headache that is | 

| thought to result from abnormal vascular phenomena, although the exact mechanism is 

Il unknown. Migraine headaches often begin with various prodromal sensations, such as nausea, | 

loss of vision in part of the field of vision, visual aura, and other types of sensory hallucinations. | 

One of the theories of the cause of migraine headaches is that prolonged emotion or tension | 

causes reflex vasospasm of some of the arteries of the head, including arteries that supply the | 

brain. The vasospasm theoretically produces ischemia of portions of the brain, and this is 

responsible for the prodromal symptoms. Then, as a result of the intense ischemia, something 

happens to the vascular walls, perhaps exhaustion of smooth muscle contraction, to allow the 

| blood vessels to become flaccid and incapable of maintaining vascular tone for 24 to 48 hours. 
The blood pressure in the vessels causes them to dilate and pulsate intensely, and it is 

postulated that the excessive stretching of the walls of the arteries—including some 

extracranial arteries, such as the temporal artery—causes the actual pain of migraine 

headaches. 
[EEE 

o CNS modulates pain, it may: 
- Exaggerating it (Pathological in thalamic Syndrome). 
- Inhibit it {physiological in analgesic system). 
A-Physiological modulation 
e Pain analgesic system: 

1- Gate Theory. 
2- Analgesic system. 
3- Brain opiate system 

A-Physiological modulation 
1- The Gate Theory 
e The theory: various relay stations in the nervous pathway of pain act as gates open or close. 

e The most important gates are: 
a) Substantia gelatinosa of Rolandi (SGR, spinal gate). 
b) Thalamus (thalamic gate). 
c) Reticular formation (RF). 

e Inhibition of Pain Transmission by Simultaneous Tactile Sensory Signals 

» Stimulation of large type AB sensory fibers from peripheral tactile receptors can depress 
transmission of pain signals from the same body area. 

» This presumably results from local lateral inhibition in the spinal cord. It explains why such 
simple maneuvers as rubbing the skin near painful areas is often effective in relieving pain. 

It probably, also, explains why liniments are often useful for pain relief. 

e At SGR, pain transmission can be blocked by: 
> Collaterals from thick myelinated AB in dorsal column. 
» Descending fibers (Centrifugal or centripetal) through presynaptic inhibition (GABA or 

enkephalin). 
o AJ (counterirritant or acupuncture); relieves pain by: 

1) Spinal pathway of pain inhibition. 
2) Psychogenic excitation of central analgesia system. 

92 



CHAPTER Il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Pain Signals can be interrupted in the substantia gelitanosa of 

LJ 

- — — 
A ¥ b x! 

os I 
er i 1 6 

A A % 1 
re a i i hr 3 

Er at NA 

rey _ 

Painful yi Af = 
j HR 4 ji 

| 1 ESE PE LY 

corpuse os ls 
ol ha.

g SS 1S 

E Fs —n ge 5 

® - = A 

Stress Analgesia: It is well known that soldiers wounded in the heat of battle often feel no 
tpain until the battle is over (stress-induced analgesia). Many people have learned from 
practical experience that touching or shaking an injured area decreases the pain due to the 
injury. Stimulation with an electric vibrator at the site of pain also gives some relief. 
1-Impulses from CC, hypothalamus to pain inhibitory complex in the spinal cord (PIC). 
2-B-endorphin from anterior pituitary gland to blood to opiate receptors. 
Acupuncture: A component of stress induced analgesia appears to be mediated by | 
endogenous opioids. It occurs at a location distant from the site of a pain and appears to act | 
primarily in the same way as touching or shaking (gate-control mechanism). ~~ | 

2- The Analgesia System 
The analgesia system consists of three major components: (1) The periaqueductal gray 

and periventricular areas of the mesencephalon and upper pons surround the aqueduct of 
Sylvius and portions of the third and fourth ventricles. Neurons from these areas send signals 
to (2) the raphe magnus nucleus, a thin midline nucleus located in the lower pons and upper 
medulla, and the nucleus reticularis paragigantocellularis, located laterally in the medulla. 
From these nuclei, second-order signals are transmitted down the dorsolateral columns in the 
spinal cord to (3) a pain inhibitory complex (PIC) located in the dorsal horns of the spinal cord. 
At this point, the analgesia signals can block the pain before it is relayed to the brain. 

Electrical stimulation either in the periaqueductal gray area or in the raphe magnus 
nucleus can suppress many strong pain signals entering by way of the dorsal spinal roots. Also, 
stimulation of areas at still higher levels of the brain that excite the periaqueductal gray area 
can also suppress pain. Some of these areas are (1) the periventricular nuclei in the 
hypothalamus, lying adjacent to the third ventricle, and (2) to a lesser extent, the medial 
forebrain bundle, also in the hypothalamus. Several transmitter substances are involved in 
the analgesia system; especially involved are enkephalin and serotonin. 

Many nerve fibers derived from the periventricular nuclei and from the 
periaqueductal gray area secrete enkephalin at their endings. 

Fibers originating in this area send signals to the dorsal horns of the spinal cord to 

93 

—] 



CHAPTER Hi: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

secrete serotonin at their endings. The serotonin causes local cord neurons to secrete 

enkephalin as well. The enkephalin is believed to cause both presynaptic and postsynaptic 

inhibition ofi ncoming type C and type Ab pain ffii bers where they synapse in the dorsal horns. 

Fig. 2.27 b: The Central — 
analgesic system 

3- The Brain Opiate System 
They are morphine like substances that are naturally present in the body. Morphine is 

an extract of opium which produces potent analgesic effect when it binds with opiate 

receptors. About twelve opiate like substances are found in the different points of the nervous 
system. The most important forms are: 

Enkephalins: 2 types (met ;methionine, leu; leucine), present in the brain stem and spinal cord. 

Endorphins: B-endorphin, more stronger than enkephalin, Present in hypothalamus, anterior 

pituitary gland. 
Dynorphins: More stronger than enkephalin, present in the areas as enkephalin but in lower 

quantities. 
B-Surgical Interruption of Pain Pathways. 

When a person has severe and intractable pain (sometimes resulting from rapidly spreading 

cancer), it is necessary to relieve the pain. 1-Anterolateral cordotomy: cut LSTT. 2-Gyrectomy in 

frontal lobe: to prevent unpleasant emotional effect of pain. 3-Laminectomy: cutting the posterior 

root. 
‘ C-Electrical treatment 

Pain can be relieved within 24 hours by electrical stimulation of Large sensory fibers in spinal cord 

or in skin, Analgesic system (PAG, PVA), Non specific thalamic nuclei. 

D-Medical treatment 
Medications to control pain (Pharmacological), as antacids in peptic ulcer, blood vessels dilator in 
ischemic pain, Anesthetic agents, Analgesic agents. 

94 



CHAPTER Hl: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

OPIOID DRUGS 

[ ANALGESICS | 
Analgesics are drugs that relieve pain due to multiple causes. They are classified into two 
groups 

Classification of Analgesics 
| 

| i 
Nonopioid Analgesics Opioid Analgesics 

e Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs. e Morphine. 
e Paracetamol. e Synthetic opioids. 

Used in mild to moderate pain Used in moderate to severe 
frmnn AICAINA pain 

“ Opioids are drugs with morphine-like effects. 
Sources 

1. Plant: morphine - codeine (termed opiates; natural alkaloids; products of opium poppy). 
2. Synthetic: fentanyl - methadone - heroin — pethidine.... 
3. Endogenous: endorphins - enkephalins - dynorphins (opiopeptides) released in the body, 

acting on opioid receptors, producing morphine-like effects. 

Classification of Opioids 

| 
{ ; 

Opioid Analgesics Opioid Antitussives Opioid Antidiarrheals 

(Less addictive than (Less addictive than 

(see below) morphine) morphine) 

eo Codeine e Loperamide 
Mechanism of Action e Dextromethorphan e Diphenoxylate 
Opioid receptors 

Mu (mediate most effects of opioids), kappa & delta, are Gi protein-coupled receptors 
present in the CNS and periphery (e.g. GIT). 

Site of action of opioids 
- Opioids activate opioid receptors and inhibit pain pathway inducing analgesia. 
- Euphoria via increasing dopamine in nucleus accumbens (the center of pleasure (Fig. 
2.28). 

95 



CHAPTER il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Pleasure 

center 

LoPfS  

Fig. 2.28: the reward pathway and center of pleasure 

At the cellular level: Activation of receptors => neuronal inhibition through: 

a. Inhibition of Ca2* entry = | release of excitatory neurotransmitters including substance 

P. (Presynaptic). 
b. Stimulation of K* outflux = hyperpolarization of neuronal membrane. (Postsynaptic). 

Activation of the oploid 
receptor decreases Ca2+ 
influx in response to incoming 
action potentiaTlhi.s decreases 
release of excitatory neuro- 
transmitters, such as 
glutamate. 

[| Opioid 
| receptor 

= 

wt by i 
|. A "J 

oo a - 

3 LH 

| opioid receptor 
I § iY a Ey 

{ Increases K+ efflux 
| and decreases the 
| response of the post- 

Fig. 2.29 Molecular Mechanisms of opioid 

96 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

| Ascending pain pathways | | Descending inhibitory pathways | 

Peraqueductal 

Limbie structures 

Thalamus 

Periaqueductal 
gray matter 

Spinothalamic 
tract 

Reticular 
formation 

| Spinothalamic 

0 TT Prima 

a Nociceptors activated 
by chemical, mechanical, 
and thermal stimuli 

| Inhibited by aspirin and 
other nonopioid analgesics 

Fig. (2.30) site of action of opioid analgesics 

Classification of Opioid Analgesics 

: ; | 
1. Strong 2. Moderate 3. Weak 

A. Pure Agonists Codeine Propoxyphene 
(Oral) 

e Morphine (Oral) e Analgesic plus 
e Fentanyl (& subgroup) 

e Analgesic plus paracetamol or 
e¢ Methadone 

paracetamol or aspirin in mild 
e Pethidine 

aspirin in to moderate 
e Heroin 

moderate pain. pain. 
B. Partial agonists 

om Amdt smrisim 

N.B.: heroin & codeine are metabolized to morphine 

97 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Table 2.11: Actions, Uses, Adverse Effects & Contraindications (Cl) of Morphine 

a BN Adverse Effects & Cl 
1. Analgesic in: I. Main Effects e Masks pain 

e Acute trauma. A. Analgesia Cl: acute undiagnosed 

e Chronic visceral pain J Pain perception & abdomen 

e Postoperative pain emotional response to e Sedation - Narcosis 

e Cancer pain pain 
e Drug dependence 

e Myocardial infarction B. Sedation 

2. In anesthesia C. Euphoria(or dysphoria) 
e Preanaesthesia 
e CV surgery 

3. Acute pulmonary Il. Inhibitory Effects e Hypotension 

edema in LVF following A. © VMC = venular & 

myocardial infarction: arterial VD ¢ Respiratory depression 
e | preload & after load & asphyxia neonatorum 

B. Respiratory center 
e | Respiratory distress depression=>1T CO; = ¢ T Intracranial tension 
e | Anxiety Cerebral VD & increased Cl: head injury 

intracranial tension 
C. © Cough center ¢ Delayed labor 

4. Antitussive D. © Uterine tone = delayed | ® Hypothermia (Toxic dose) 
Replaced by labor 
Codeine E. © Thermoregulatory 

(less addictive) 

5. Antidiarrheal Ii. Stimulatory Effects e Miosis 
Loperamide A. @ Oculomotor nucleus e Nausea - vomiting 

Diphenoxylate -* miosis 
¢ Urine retention (alsot ADH) 

(less addictive, more widely B. ® CTZ =» vomiting 
used) (CI: enlarged prostate 

e Biliary colic(Cl) 
C. Urinary & Gl Tracts 

1? tone of wall & sphincters e Constipation 

(spasmogenic) e Hypotension — itching - 
but © peristalsis =» stools bronchospasm(Cl: asthma) 
stagnate & harden due to 
fluid absorption. 

D. Histamine release 

Other effects: seizures & rigidity in 1 doses._Cl: age extremes - hypothyroidism - liver 

dysfunction ({ metabolism). Tolerance develops to all effects except constipation & miosis. 

08 



CHAPTER Il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Four types of sever pain in Which morphine is Contraindicated or Not 
Recommended. 

1. Acute Undiagnosed Abdominal pain 
Because morphine is a strong analgesic and therefore 
it will mask the cause of pain which may lead to 
serious Or even fatal consequences e.g. pain of 
Appendicitis, intestinal obstruction 
2. Normal Labor Pain 
-Because morphine induce uterine relaxation and may 
delay normal Labor 
-Also, morphine can cross the placenta and induce 
Respiratory center depression to the fetus leading to 
Asphyxia Neonatorum 
3. Closed Head injury 
Because morphine may increase intracranial pressure 
and increase brain damage 
4. Biliary Colic (Gall Bladder Pain) 
Morphine was generally not recommended due to 
concerns that it may increase the tone of the sphincter 
of Oddi. However, this has not been shown to be 
clinically significant. 

"GALLBLADDER ATTALE 

Binary Coie 
Fig. {2.31) pain in which morphine is contraindicated (CI) 5 

Bue Buen -_ SOT MIDoEmAL Pay 

Il. Pure Agonists py 1 

1. Morphine (see table). 

Given IV - IM - SC - epidurally - orally (extensive 1% pass metabolism). 
2. Pethidine( Meperidine) [IM - Oral] 

e Used in ACUTE moderate & severe pain e.g, trauma, postoperative pain, biliary 
colic or labor pain. 

Pethidine differs from morphine in: 
1. Less constipating (shorter acting). 
2. Less respiratory depressant in neonates! & does not delay labor =» preferred during 

labor (¥ risk of asphyxia neonatorum). 
3. Atropine-like action: dry mouth, blurred vision, ............... 
4. T Risk of convulsions with high dose or in renal failure due to accumulation of toxic 

metabolite, norpethidine. So => NOT used for more than 48 hours (No chronic use). 

! Morphine metabolism (conjugation ) is deficient in newborns = longer depressant effect on 
respiration. 

99 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

3. Fentanyl 

e More potent than morphine with rapid onset & shorter action (preferred in 

anesthesia). 

e High anesthetic doses—> chest wall rigidity|—, thoracic compliance - J ventilation. 

Uses (IV- epidural- spinal - transdermal patch — patient-controlled infusion) 

1. Analgesic in severe pain e.g. perioperative & cancer pain. 

2. In anesthesia (for its analgesic & sedative effects): 
Preanesthetic medication. 
IV anesthetic in cardiovascular surgery (safer). 

4. Heroin 
Diacetylmorphine converted to morphine in CNS. 
Rapid onset (greater lipid solubility = crosses BBB more than morphine) & short duration 

-> ? risk of abuse (not used clinically in most countries). 

5. Tramadol (mixed opioid/nonopioid) 

-Analgesic acting by inhibiting uptake of 5- HT and NA (Noradrenaline). 

- Weak Mu agonist (only partially antagonized by naloxone). 

- Advantages: Less constipation, respiratory depression & addiction than morphine. 

- Disadvantages: 1 Risk of convulsions more than morphine. 

Uses (oral, IM, IV) 
- Analgesic in postoperative & chronic moderate pain & in neuropathic pain. 

6. Methadone [Oral] 

Uses 
1. Treatment of opioid addicts (detoxification mainly): 

» Orally-active & long acting, thus, it is used to replace morphine or heroin in addicts. 

Gradual withdrawal of methadone is associated with less severe & smoother 

withdrawal symptoms. 
2. Analgesic in severe chronic pain (efficacy equal to morphine). 

N.B.: Methadone may prolong QT interval = 4 risk of torsades de pointes. 

II. Partial Agonists 

Buprenorphine (partial Mu receptor agonist) 
Advantages over Pure Agonists 

1. Less addiction (less euphoria — less craving). 
2. Less Respiratory depression. 

Uses (parenteral, sublingual) 
1. Analgesic in severe pain. 

2. Alternative to methadone for treatment of opioid addict detoxification (long-acting, 

slowly dissociates from receptors); leading to smooth withdrawal. 
Drug Interactions of Opioids 

1. Opioids + other CNS depressants (sedatives, alcohol, antidepressants & antipsychotics) 

-> additive CNS depression. 

100 



CHAPTER Il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

2. Tramadol or Pethidine + MAOIs => serotonin syndrome (hyperpyrexia- convulsions). 
3. Partial agonist + pure agonist => withdrawal syndrome & { analgesic effect. 

Acute Morphine Toxicity 
Coma, Respiratory depression. 
Pinpointed pupil (diagnostic). 

Treatment 
e Support respiration. 

e Naloxone (IV, SC pen, nasal spray): opioid antagonist, repeated when necessary and 
Signs of improvement: increase in respiratory rate and pupillary dilation. 

Pure Opioid Antagonists? 

v_ + 
Naloxone Naltrexone 

IV & short-acting Oral & long-acting 

Management of acute toxicity Maintenance therapy in addicts 

1. Acute opioid toxicity 1. Opioid abuse 

Repeated as necessary to avoid Blocks euphoria of opioids = loss 
relapse into coma since duration of desire to take drug (prevents 
of action is shorter than opioids. relapse). 

2. Asphyxia neonatorum 2. Alcohol abuse’ 

Respiratory stimulant in opioid- 
induced respiratory depression J, Craving in chronic alcoholics 

{ om nmr PYREPR TG Pe—— 

? Inhibition of pethidine metabolism by MAOIs = formation of the toxic metabolite, norpethidine, by another 
metabolic pathway. Pethidine inhibit SHT reuptake and norpethidine can stimulate some SHT receptors. 

3 Alcohol induces euphoria indirectly via release of endogenous opioids in reward system (at VTA). 
N.B.:-Addicts should be closely monitored during reversal of acute opioid toxicity with naloxone to 
avoid precipitation of withdrawal symptoms. 

- Naltrexone should be given to opioid addicts after full detoxification, otherwise it would 
precipitate a withdrawal syndrome. 

101 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Stage I: Up to 8 hours 

Fig. (2.32) Symptoms of Morphine Withdrawal 

Treatment of Addiction: 
1. Symptomatic treatment e.g. NSAIDs for pain, Antiemetic ....... 
2. Sympatholytic: e.g. Clonidine 
3. Detoxification: 

Use long-acting opioid drugs as Methadone or Buprenorphine to replace heroin or 
morphine and then gradual withdrawal (less severity of withdrawal symptoms). 
4. Maintenance: 
Use opioid receptor blocker, Naltrexone to Block euphoria of opioids = prevents relapse. 

102 



CHAPTER Ii THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

DORSAL COLUMN TRACTS (Fig. 2.33) 

e Function: carries proprioception (deep sensations) 
Gracile tract from the lower part of body 
(below T6). 
Cuneate tract from the upper part of body 
(above 76). 

e Beginning: They are formed by the central processes of the pseudounipolar dorsal root 
ganglion cells. They enter the spinal cord via the dorsal root. 

e Position in spinal cord: they occupy the posterior white column. The Gracile tract lies 
medially in all segments & the Cuneate tract lies lateral to it, above T6. 

e Lamination: in the dorsal (posterior) column the coccygeal & sacral fibers lie most medially 
while cervical fibers lie most laterally. 

e Termination: The Gracile & Cuneate tracts ascend in the spinal cord to reach the medulla 
& end on Gracile & Cuneate Nuclei of the medulla. During their ascent, the fibers send 
collateral branches that end on dorsal horn of spinal cord. 

Sensations carried by dorsal column tracts: 
1. Fine touch 

Proprioception 
Vibration 
Deep pressure 
Stereognosis 

Fig. 2.33: gracile & cuneate tracts 

103 

Nh wh 

Ld 

{ 

— El we ae 



CHAPTER ll: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Pathways of Conscious Proprioception & Fine Touch (Fig. 2.34) 

First Neuron: Dorsal Root Ganglion cells which are pseudounipolar. Their peripheral 

processes carry sensations from deep receptors (in muscles, tendons & joints). Their central 

processes pass to the spinal cord via the dorsal root. Fibers from the lower part of the body 

(below T6) ascend medially in the dorsal column forming the gracile tract. Fibers from the 

upper part of the body (above T6) ascend laterally in the dorsal column forming the cuneate 

tract. Lamination: sacral fibers are most medial & cervical fibers are most lateral. 

- During their ascent, the fibers send 
collateral branches that end on the dorsal 
horn of spinal cord. These form the septo- 
marginal tract (from Gracile) & Comma- 
shaped tract (from cuneate). 

- Some cervical fibers end on the accessory 
cuneate nucleus (posterior to the cuneate 
nucleus), its axons (cuneo-cerebellar 
fibers) pass to the cerebellum. 

Second Neuron: Gracile & Cuneate Nuclei of 
the medulla oblongata. Axons of these nuclei 
cross the median plane (forming the internal 
arcuate fibers (sensory decussation). Fibers 
ascend in brain stem as the medial lemniscus 
to reach the thalamus 

Third Neuron: Ventral posterolateral Nucleus 
of thalamus (VPLN). Axons of these cells pass 
through posterior limb of internal capsule, 
then through corona radiata to reach sensory 
area of cerebral cortex. 

Fig. 2.34: Dorsal column Pathway 

104 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Tracts of Unconscious Proprioception 

Four tracts carry unconscious proprioception to 
the cerebellum (For coordination of movement) 

1. Posterior spinocerebellar tract: (Fig. 2.35) 
Carries proprioception from lower limb & trunk. 
The central processes of DRG cells enter the spinal 
cord via the dorsal root to end on ipsilateral 
Clarke’s nucleus. 
The tract ascends ipsilaterally in the lateral white 
column, posterior to the anterior spinocerebellar 
tract & enters the ipsilateral cerebellum via the 
inferior cerebellar peduncle (ICP). 

Anterior spinocerebellar tract: (Fig. 2.36) 
Carries proprioception from the lower limb. 
The central processes enter the spinal cord via the 
dorsal root to end on laminae V-ViIl. 
Axons forming the tract mostly decussate, but few 
remain ipsilateral. Fig. 2.36: ant. sp. cerebellar T. 
They enter the cerebellum via the superior 
cerebellar peduncle (SCP) then cross again to reach 
the ipsilateral cerebellum. 

3. Spino-olivary Tract: (Fig. 2.37) 
It carries proprioception from both upper & lower 
limbs. 
Its second order neuron fibers cross & ascend at 
the junction of lateral & ventral white columns to 
end on the contralateral olivary nuclei. 
Olivocerebellar fibers cross & pass via the ICP to 
reach the ipsilateral cerebellum. 

4. Collaterals from cuneate tract: (Fig. 2.38) carry 
proprioception from the upper limb to the accessory 
cuneate nucleus of the medulla. Axons of the 
accessory cuneate nucleus form the external arcuate 
fibers (Cuneocerebellar tract) which reach the 
ipsilateral cerebellum via the ICP. 

Fig. 2.38: cuneo-cerebellar T. 

105 

LY = " 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

SENSATIONS CARRIED BY DORSAL COLUMN TRACTS 
The dorsal column pathway (medial lemniscus) 
The dorsal column pathway carries signals from mechanoreceptors of the skin, joints and 

muscle. It transmits discriminatory (fine) touch, proprioception, vibration, deep pressure and 

stereognosis information to higher brain centers by a sequence of three neurons. 

The neuron sequence: Refer to anatomy lecture. 

Dorsal column sensations: 
1- Fine touch 

‘ 2 Proprioception 
3 Vibration 
4 Deep pressure 
5 Stereognosis. 

1- Fine touch sensation (Discriminatory touch) 

Fine touch is a discriminatory, sharply localized type of touch. It includes 2 types: 
A. Tactile localization. 
B. Tactile (two- point) discrimination. 

A, Tactile localization 
Definition: the ability of the body to detect exactly a point of contact with objects, with 

closed eyes. 
Receptors: 

- Name: Meissner’s corpuscles, Merckle’s discs, Pacinian corpuscles and Ruffini end 

organ. 
- Type: mechanoreceptors. 

- Mechanism of stimulation: mechanical displacement or deformity of receptors that 
leads to their stimulation. 

Afferent neuron type: AB type of fibers. 
Ascending sensory pathway: dorsal column pathway. 
Higher nervous perception site: somatosensory cortex. 
Adaptation: rapid adaptation 
How to test: Two marker test 

. Tactile discrimination 
Definition: the ability of the body to discriminate between two points of contact, 

touched at the same time, with closed eyes. 
Receptors: 
- Name: Meissner’s corpuscles, Merckle’s discs, Paccinian corpuscles and Ruffini end 

organ. 
- Type: mechanoreceptors. 

- Mechanism of stimulation: mechanical displacement or deformity of receptors that 

leads to their stimulation. 
Afferent neuron type: AB type of fibers. 
Ascending sensory pathway: dorsal column pathway. 

106 



CHAPTER Ii: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Higher nervous perception site: somatosensory cortex. 
Adaptation: rapid adaptation 
How to test: Weber compass test 
Threshold distance: 
v' It is the minimal distance between 2 points to be felt as 2 separate points. 
v’ Threshold distance is variable according to body location on body surface. It is about 

2-3 mm on the lips and fingertips, 3-6 mm on the dorsum of hands, and increases to 
over 40-60 mm on the back. 

v' If the distance between 2 points is less than the minimum distance, only 1 point will 
be felt. 

v' Compared to areas with high threshold distance (back), areas of the body with low 
threshold distance (fingertips) are characterized by: 
- Large number of receptors. 
Large number of afferents. 
Less convergence between afferents. 
Small receptive field. 
Large area of representation in the sensory cortex. 
High degree of sensory acuity. 

Fig. 2.39: Compass test showing 
(a): threshold distance between 2 points. 

{b): threshold distance in different areas in the body 

107 



CHAPTER Hl: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

2- Proprioceptive sensations (Sense of position and movement) 

Proprioception includes the sense of position and the sense of movement. These sensations 

are important for maintaining balance and controlling body movements. [tis of 2 types: 

A. Sense of position. 
B. Sense of movement (passive movement by the doctor/ kinesthesia). 

A. Sense of position: 
Definition: It is the ability of the body to detect the position of different body parts, 
relative to each other's and relative to space. 
Receptors: 
- Name: Muscle spindle (in muscles), Golgi tendon organs (in tendons), and Ruffini end 

organ (in joint capsules). 
- Type: mechanoreceptors. 
- Mechanism of stimulation: mechanical displacement or deformity of receptors that 

leads to their stimulation. 
Afferent neuron type: AB type of fibers. 

Ascending sensory pathway: Dorsal column pathway. 

Higher nervous perception site: somatosensory cortex. 
Adaptation: slow adaptation (tonic receptors) 

B. Sense of movement (kinesthesia) 
Definition: It is the ability of the body to detect the direction and the rate of movement 

of the different body parts, relative to each other’s and relative to space. 
Receptors: 
- Name: Muscle spindle (in muscles), Golgi tendon organs (in tendons), Ruffini end 

organ (in joint capsules), and Pacinian corpuscles (in tendons and ligaments). 

- Type: mechanoreceptors. 
- Mechanism of stimulation: mechanical displacement or deformity of receptors that 

leads to their stimulation. 
Afferent neuron type: AB type of fibers. 
Ascending sensory pathway: Dorsal column pathway. 
Higher nervous perception site: Somatosensory cortex. 
Adaptation: slow adaptation (tonic receptors) 

v' Pacinian corpuscles are rapidly adapting receptors, but these receptors are 

responsible only for the initial transient signals about the rate of joint movement. 

v' The impulses from a single receptor cover a limited range ofj oint angles. 

v' The impulses from all the receptors from a given joint cover the entire range of limb 

movement. 

N.B.: 
Proprioception is a conscious sensation, transmitted by the dorsal column, and perceived at 

the level of the sensory cortex. However, for maintaining balance, unconscious proprioceptive 

information is transmitted through the spinocerebellar tracts to the cerebellum. 

108 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

3- Vibration sensations 

Definition: It is the ability of the body to feel a rhythmic, repetitive pressure sensation when 
a vibrating tuning fork is placed on bony prominences, while eyes are closed. 
Receptors: 

- Name: All tactile (touch and pressure) receptors are involved in detection of vibration, 
although different receptors detect different frequencies of vibration. The main 
receptors that detect vibration are: Pacinian corpuscles (detect vibrations from 30 to 800 
cycles/sec), and Meissner’s corpuscles (detect vibrations from 2 to 80 cycles/sec). 

- Type: mechanoreceptors. 
- Mechanism of stimulation: mechanical displacement or deformity of receptors that leads 

to their stimulation. 
Afferent neuron type: AB type of fibers. 
Ascending sensory pathway: Dorsal column pathway. 
Higher nervous perception site: somatosensory cortex. 
Adaptation: Vibration sense receptors are rapidly adapting receptors. 

4- Deep pressure sensation 

Definition: It is the ability to detect approximate weight (heaviness) of objects without lifting 
them, while the eyes are closed. 
Receptors: 

- Name: Ruffini end organ and deep Pacinian corpuscles present in deeper layers of skin, 
fascia and muscles. 

- Type: mechanoreceptors. 
- Mechanisomf stimulation: mechanical displacement or deformity of receptors that leads 

to their stimulation. 
Afferent neuron type: AP type of fibers. 
Ascending sensory pathway: dorsal column pathway. 
Higher nervous perception site: somatosensory cortex. 
Adaptation: slow adaptation 
How to test: Test for pressure sense with arm supported. 

5- Stereognosis sensation 

Definition: The ability to recognize the size, shape, and texture of familiar objects by 
palpation, while eyes are closed. 
Requirements for stereognosis: 

- Stimulation of multiple sensory mechanoreceptors as well as muscle and joint receptors. 
- A higher level of cortical processing (cortical association areas). 

Interruption of inputs from receptors and from the thalamus may severely impair 
stereognosis, but the actual physiologic mechanism responsible for this highly educated 
cortical sensation is present in the somatosensory cortex. 
How to test: Test for stereognosis using familiar object. 

109 



CHAPTER Ii: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

SOMATOSENSORY CORTEX 

Somatosensory cortex is the part of the parietal lobe cortex, where sensory information is 

perceived and interpreted to provide a perception of the body and the environment. 

Site: in the parietal lobe, behind the central sulcus and above the lateral sulcus (postcentral). 

Components: it involves: Somatosensory areas | (S-l, primary somatosensory cortex, 

Brodmann’s areas: 3,1,2), Somatosensory areas ll, and sensory association areas (posterior 

parietal areas, Brodmann'’s areas: 5,7). 

Fig. 2.40: Somatosensory areas 

1- Somatosensory areas| {S-| 

Site: Refer to anatomy 
- It is the primary somatosensory cortex because it is the major site of termination of 

axons of the sensory nuclei of the thalamus. 

- Electrical stimulation of SI produces somatosensory perceptions. 

Body representation in S-1 (Fig. 2.37): 
v' Somatosensory area | has a high degree of localization of the different parts of the body. 

v' Representation of the body parts in 5-1 is: 
- Crossed: The body and face are mapped in the contralateral cortex. 

- Inverted: The face is represented in the lower half of the postcentral gyrus, while the 

foot, leg and the trunk in the upper half of the postcentral gyrus. 
- Disproportional to body area size but proportionate to number of receptors in body 

area: the lips and some other areas of the body are represented by large areas in the 

somatic cortex, whereas the trunk and lower part of the body are represented by 

relatively small areas. The sizes of these areas are directly proportional to the number 

of specialized sensory receptors in each area of the body. 

110 



CHAPTER Ii: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

Ft hy 
ad

<  

0” N\Q) 
Gee 

=, —— Teeth, gums, and jaw 
| | I= Tongue 

\— Intra-abdominal al 

Fig. 2.41; Representation of different body parts in somatosensory area I 

- Neurons of the somatosensory cortex are arranged in vertical columns extending all 
the way through the six layers of the cortex. Each column detects a specific sensory 
modality. The most anterior columns respond to muscle, tendon, and joint stretch 
receptors. Posteriorly columns respond to slowly adapting cutaneous receptors. 
More posterior columns are sensitive to deep pressure. The most posterior columns 
respond only when a stimulus moves across the skin. 

Functions of S-I: 
S-l is responsible for perception of the following sensations: 

- Fast pain 
- Fine touch 
- Fine degrees of thermal sensations 
- Vibration 
- Stereognosis 
- Proprioception 
- Deep pressure 

Lesions of S-I: 
So, lesions in S-I produce severe somatosensory deficits: 

1. Inability to localize the different sensations in the different parts of the body. However, 
the patient can localize these sensations crudely through the thalamus. 

2. Inability to judge critical degrees of pressure against the body. 
Inability to judge the weights of objects. 

4. Pain and temperature are poorly affected, but they are poorly localized, indicating that 
pain and temperature localization depend on the somatosensory area |. 

111 

a 



CHAPTER II: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

2- Somatosensory areas lI (S-11) 

Site: refer to anatomy. 
Body representation in S-ll: 
Poor localization is found in somatosensory area Il. Roughly, the face is represented 

anteriorly, the arms centrally, and the legs posteriorly. It receives sensory stimuli from both 

sides of the body. 
Functions of S-Ii: 
Much less is known about the function of somatosensory area |. 

v' 5-11 receives sensory signals from somatosensory area | and from other sensory areas of 

the brain, even from the visual and auditory areas. 

* S-|| projection to the somatosensory association cortex is involved in higher order 

processing required for recognizing hand-held objects by texture and size. 

* S-|I neurons send their axons to other areas important in tactile learning and memory; 

association cortex, motor cortex, and insula, amygdala and hippocampus. 

So, lesions in S-Il produce deficits in learning by object manipulation and in recognizing the 

texture and size of hand-held objects. 

3- Sensory association areas 

Site: refer to anatomy 

Functions of sensory association areas: Somatosensory association area receives signals from 

(1) Somatosensory areas | and II 
(2) The sensory nuclei and other areas of the thalamus, direct or via 51 and 2 

(3) The visual cortex 
(4) The auditory cortex. 

it seems clear that the somatosensory association area collects and combines information 

arriving from multiple areas to understand its meaning. 

Lesion of somatosensory association area: Inability to judge shapes or forms of objects. This 

condition is called astereognosis. 
Neglect syndrome: 

v' Classically Neglect has been associated with lesions of the right posterior parietal cortex, 

particularly the inferior parietal lobe. 

vA partial neglect (inattention) to tactile, proprioceptive and/or visual stimuli delivered 

from the contralateral side of the lesion site. 
v The patient is described as ignoring the contralateral half of the body and space. The 

perception of a "whole" body is lost, and the body parts affected may be considered to 

belong to someone else. 
The person also forgets to use the other side for motor functions as well. 

Likewise, when feeling objects, the person tends to recognize only one side of the object 

and forgets that the other side even exists. This complex sensory deficit is called 

‘Amorphosynthesis’. 

112 

EEN 



CHAPTER Il: THE SENSORY SYSTEM 

VOY suhins yrunini frolnbug 

Fig. 2.42: lesion in right association somatosensory area cause neglect of left side of the 
patient world 

The Thalamus 

Definition: It is a subcortical mass of gray matter at the lateral wall of 3 ventricle. 
Thalamic nuclei: 

v" From functional point of view it is classified into 
v" Non-specific nuclei that receive inputs from reticular formation and project to whole 

cortex. 
v' Specific nuclei that is either sensory or motor nuclei that is connected to certain cortical 

areas. 

Functions of the thalamus: 
1) It is the highest center of crude sensations. 
2) Itis relay station for: 

a) Fine sensation 
b) Hearing and visual pathways. 
c) Motor fibers from cerebellum and basal ganglia. 

3) Asitis connected to the limbic system, it has control on emotions. 
4) As itis connected to RAS, it has a role in consciousness. 
5) As itis connected to pre-frontal area, it has a role in personality and behavior. 
6) Itis responsible for alpha wave in EEG. 

113 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Chapter - lil 

THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

INTERNAL STRUCTURE AND IMPACT OF 

DIFFERENT LESIONS ON MOTOR AND 

SENSORY SYSTEMS 

114 



CHAPTER ll: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

CHAPTER lili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD INTERNAL 
STRUCTURE AND IMPACT OF DIFFERENT LESIONS ON 

MOTOR AND SENSORY SYSTEMS 

Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs): 

By the end of this chapter the student should be able to: 

Identify the origin, course, distribution and termination of the corticospinal and 
corticonuclear tract. 
Predict the effects of lesion of corticospinal and corticonuclear tracts. 

e Describe the origin, course and termination of the extrapyramidal tracts. 
Identify white matter funiculi and the tracts present in different spinal cord 
segments. 

Compare between the different levels of spinal cord. 
Describe the blood supply of spinal cord (arterial and venous). 
Predict the effects of occlusion of spinal arteries. 
Describe causes and features of vascular and traumatic lesions of spinal cord. 
Identify the components of a reflex arc. 
Identify functions of muscle spindle and causes of stimulation. 
Explain the function of gamma motor neurons. 
Recognize the properties of stretch reflex and its reflection on the motor 
examination. 
Compare static and dynamic stretch reflex. 
Recognize the significance of alpha gamma co-activation. 
Explain higher centers control of muscle stretch reflex and its physiological and 
clinical importance. 

Discuss components of inverse stretch reflex and other spinal reflexes and their 
physiological application and clinical importance. 
Recognize different types of anterior horn cells and their physiological role. 
Recognize how an idea is converted to motor act and different brain areas 
sharing in motor action. 
List motor areas of the brain. 
Define the function of each motor area and how to assess clinically. 
Explain the physiological significances of the different tracts in motor control. 
Explain the mechanism of cortical control on axial and distal muscles. 
Describe causes and features of different vascular, traumatic and degenerative 
lesions of spinal cord. 

Compare between the effects of lesion in different cortical sensory areas. 
Describe upper and lower motor neuron and compare between their lesions. 
Explain Babinski’s sign, clonus, lengthening reaction. 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Describe the difference between sensory and motor ataxia. 
Define the various terminologies of the basal nuclei. 
Describe the anatomy of the caudate & lentiform nuclei. 
List the connections of the basal nuclei. 
Appreciate the effect of the disruption of the balance of neurotransmitters. 
Identify the pathogenesis, most important clinical and pathologic features of 
Huntington disease and Parkinson’s disease. 
Recognize antiparkinsonian therapy aims, effect, adverse effects and their 

managements. 
Predict the role of apomorphine in emergency cases of sudden immobility. 
Apply the pharmacological basis for proper optimization of L-dopa therapy via 
its combination with decarboxylase inhibitors (e.g. carbidopa), COMT inhibitors 

(e.g. entacapone), MAO-B inhibitors (e.g. selegiline) or dopamine agonists. 

Design the therapeutic strategies and precautions that delay the onset of L- 
dopa related motor complications. 
construct a summarized treatment algorithm for Parkinson’s disease based on 
the most evident treatment guidelines. 
Apply the pharmacological basis for proper management of L dopa related 
motor and non- motor side effect. 
Predict the adverse effects of other antiparkinsonian drugs and special 
precautions during their use. 
Describe anatomical features and blood supply of cerebellum. 
Describe different layers and cells of cerebellar cortex. 
Compare between climbing and Mossy fibers. 
Enumerate its Nuclei. 
List fibers passing in each cerebellar peduncle. 
Describe the functions of the connections between the cerebellum and areas of 
the brain and effect of lesions. 
Appreciate the role of the cerebellum in motor coordination. 
Identify Spinocerebellar ataxia (Cause and clinical picture). 
List types of tumors commonly affect the cerebellum. 
Describe the pathologic features of each type. 
Outline the importance of supra-spinal control of stretch reflex in motor act. 

Give examples for disturbances in supraspinal control of stretch reflex. 

Differentiate between term spasticity and rigidity, decerebrate and decorticate 
rigidity. 
Deduce causes of hypotonia. 
Know about basic motor pathway 
Differentiate Between Upper and Lower Motor Neuron lesion Findings 
Interpret the findings and its contribution to localization of pathology. 
Know types of reflexes. 
Examine reflexes 
Interpret reflexes 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

CERBRAL HEMISPHERE (MOTOR CORTEX) 

The posterior part of the frontal lobe “Precentral area” is motor in function while its anterior 
part “prefrontal area” is responsible for the higher mental functions (Fig. 3.1). 

I- Precentral area 
includes: 
1. Primary motor area (Area 4) 
2. Premotor area (Area 6) 
3. Frontal eye field (Area 8) 
4. Broca’s area (Areas 44 & 45) 

1. Primary motor area Ml (Area 4): 
® Site: precentral gyrus and ant. part of paracentral lobule. 
* Body representation: it contains a map of the contralateral % of the body 

represented upside down “motor homunculus” i.e., the face is lower down & the 
leg and foot in the paracentral lobule. Representation is proportionate to skill, i.e., 
parts with fine skilled movements (e.g. hands) occupy larger areas. 

* Function: Initiates discrete voluntary movements (which were planned in area 6). 
e Lesion: Contralateral hemiplegia especially skilled, fine movements. 

2. Premotor area (Area 6) 
o Site: Infront of area 4 (in sup, middle & inf. frontal gyri). It extends also on medial 

surface of cerebral hemisphere. 
* Function: Plans the movement and stores the plan. It adjusts the posture to start 

the movement. It inhibits muscle tone and grasp reflex. 
o lesion: Awkwardness of movements “apraxia”, Spasticity of muscles & 

reappearance of the Grasp reflex 

3. Frontal Eye Field | (Area 8): 
eo Site: In front of area 6 (in superior & middle frontal gyri). 
* Function: it is part of frontal eye field responsible for voluntary conjugate eye 

movements. Its stimulation leads to contralateral deviation of both eyes. 
eo lesion: 

2. Ipsilateral deviation of both eyes {towards side of lesion). 
3. Inability to turn eyes to opposite side. 

Note: (Reflex conjugate eye movement is not affected because it is controlled 
by occipital eye field). 

4. Broca’s Area (Areas 44, 45): 
Site: in the pars triangularis (area 45) and the pars opercularis (area 44) of the 
inferior frontal gyrus. It is present only in Dominant Hemisphere (usually the left 
hemisphere) 

e Function: contains the motor speech area (Anterior Speech Area). It receives data 
from the sensory speech “Wernicke’s” area. It programs a sequence of muscle 
contractions necessary to produce intelligible words & project these orders to the 

117 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

nearby area 4. 
e Lesion: Expressive (motor) Aphasia; in which the patient cannot pronounce the 

word easily but selects proper words. 

5. Supplementary motor area (Mii): 
e Site: on the medial surface of hemisphere within the medial frontal gyrus. 

e Body representation: bilateral (its stimulation evokes movements in both 

contralateral and ipsilateral limbs). The head is anterior & the leg is posterior. 

e Functions: It stores programmed motor sequences for stereotyped movements. [t 

also contains a superior speech center. 
e Lesion: leads to akinetic mutism (temporary inability to move & aphasia). 

II- Prefrontal Area: 
eo Site: 

- Remainder of superior, middle, and inferior frontal gyri. 
- Orbital gyri. 
- Most of medial frontal gyrus. 

e Function: It has a role in intelligence, normal expression of emotion, ability to predict 

consequences of an action; also it affects behavior and personality. 

e Lesion: Changes in behavior, personality and mood. 

Coanmtral S. 

c. Homunculus 
Area 

18 & 
19 

Fig. 3.1: Functional areas 

d. Medial view 

118 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

PYRAMIDAL TRACT 

Pyramidal Tract (Fig. 3.2) 

Origin: From neurons in cerebral cortex. 
e The majority of fibers arise from the 

motor area 4 and the premotor area 
6. 

eo Some fibers arise from the 
postcentral sensory cortex (Area 3, 1, 
2) and the parietal cortex A5. Fibers 
from the sensory cortex descend to 
terminate on the contralateral dorsal 
horn of the spinal cord for 
modulation of sensations. 

Lat. Cortico-SpinalT 

Course: Ant. Cortico-Spinal T 
e Axons of neurons in the cerebral 

cortex descend & converge in the 
corona radiata 

e Pass in the anterior 2/3 of posterior 
limb of internal capsule 

e¢ Descend in the middle 3/5 of the crus 
cerebri (basis pedunculi of midbrain) 

e Descend as scattered bundles in the 
basis pontis separated by the Fig. 3.2: pyramidal tract 
transverse pontine fibers. 

o Fibers collect and form the pyramid of the medulla oblongata 
* 80% of fibers cross in the lowermost part of the medulla forming the motor 

decussation then descend in the spinal cord as the lateral corticospinal tract which 
lies in the lateral white column. 

* The uncrossed Fibers descend in the spinal cord as the anterior corticospinal tract. 
The uncrossed corticospinal fibers usually cross at a lower level (in the spinal cord). 

e In the cerebral cortex: the body is represented upside down with the face area 
lowermost and foot area on the medial surface of the cerebral hemisphere. 

* In the internal capsule: fibers for face muscles are in the genu, upper limb area lie 
most anterior & lower limb area most posterior in the posterior limb of internal 
capsule. 

e In the midbrain & spinal cord: (lateral corticospinal tract) cervical fibers are medial 
while sacral fibers are lateral. 

Termination: 
1- In spinal cord: 

The crossed fibers (80%) end on the lateral group of anterior horn cells (AHCs) which 
supply the limbs. 

119 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

e The uncrossed fibers (20%) end on the medial group of AHCs (supplying the trunk). 

o Few fibers from ipsilateral cortex descend directly forming the ipsilateral 

corticospinal tract that joins the lateral corticospinal tract from the opposite side. It 

helps recovery in case upper motor neuron lesion. 

N.B.: Uncrossed fibers of ventral and the ipsilateral corticospinal tract supply mainly 

the abdominal and the respiratory muscles. 

2- In brain stem: 
Some pyramidal tract fibers do not reach the spinal cord but end on motor nuclei of 

cranial nerves that lie in the brain stem. These fibers form the corticonuclear tract 

(corticobulbar tract) which controls muscles of the head. 

Fibers of the corticonuclear tract (Fig. 3.3) descend in the corona radiata, genu of 

internal capsule, to reach the brain stem to terminate mainly on contralateral motor 

nuclei present in brain stem and on ipsilateral nuclei as well. Two exceptions for this 

double control are: 
1. The part of motor nucleus of facial nerve that controls muscles of the lower part of 

the face. 
2. The part of the hypoglossal nucleus that controls genioglossus muscle (the most 

bulky muscle of the tongue). 
These muscles receive contralateral corticonuclear fibers only. 

N.B.: 

e Neurons from the cerebral cortex that descend to end on the AHCs or motor nuclei 

of cranial nerves form the upper motor neuron. 

Fig. 3.3: cortico-nuclear tract 

120 



CHAPTER Hi: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

EXTRAPYRAMIDAL TRACTS 
These are descending tracts, apart from the pyramidal tract, that influence the AHCs. These 
tracts are named according to their starting point. They are under control of cortical motor 
areas 6 & 45, the cerebellum and basal nuclei. They are either crossed, uncrossed, or a 
combination. They are responsible for adjusting muscle tone, posture and the semiautomatic 
movements such as swinging the arm during walking. They may be excitatory or inhibitory to 
muscle tone. On the other hand, the pyramidal tract is responsible for skilled voluntary 
movements in the distal parts of the limbs. 

Table 3.1 Tectospinal and rubrospinal tra cts 
— 

| Tec to-spinal trac t |  Rubro-- sSp inaal tra ct 
| superior colliculusi n upper Red nucleusi n upper level 

level of midbrain of midbrain 
3S“ End neck muscles upper limb 

“Functioni  turning of head & neck in controls muscle tone in 
a, response to auditory, visual & upper limb (with pyramidal 

¥ cutaneous stimuli tract) 

Ventral Regnituisl | 
decussation ls 

Fig. 3.4: tecto & rubro-sp 

Table 3.2: Medial ane lnverelv estibulo- pal ae 
P—— 

Med. vestibular nucleus ry vestibular nnu cleus 

End Alpha & gamma neurons of extensor muscles 

La 

Table 3.3: Medial and lateral reticulospinal tracts 
i R= | NRMA  edd . rie ticulo-sp inal-t ract  | LL:a t.  rettiiccyu lo -spinal | traa ct Zz| 

Origin | lil Pontine RF Medullary RF. 
~~ End | gamma motor neurons of Lamina IX 

Fig. 3.6: reticulospinal T 

121 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

THE WHITE MATTER OF THE SPINAL CORD internal structure 

The white matter is peripheral in position in the spinal cord. It surrounds the gray matter. 

It is divided into (Fig. 3.7): 

1- Posterior white column or funiculus: lies between the midline (posteromedial septum) 

and the entry of the posterior nerve roots. 

2- Lateral white column or funiculus: lies between the entrance of the posterior nerve roots 

and the emergence of the anterior nerve roots. | 

3- Anterior white column or funiculus: lies between the point of emergence of the anterior 

nerve roots and the antero-median fissure (midline) 

Lateral 
white 

column 

Fig. 3.7: Parts of white matter of spinal cord 

Structure of the white matter 

It is formed of myelinated nerve fibers, neuroglia and blood vessels (continuous non- 

fenestrated) They are grouped together in bundles known as tracts. 

The tract is a group of myelinated nerve fibers having the same origin, same course, same 

termination and performs certain definite function. 

Table 3.5: Classification of Tracts 
I) Long tracts It) Short tracts: 

Ascending tracts: 

A) Exteroceptive tracts 1) Comma shaped tract 

B) Proprioceptive tracts 2) Septomarginal tract 

3) Lissauer’s tract 

Descending tracts: 4) Fasciculus proprius tract 
A) Pyramidal tract 

B) Extra-pyramidal tracts 

122 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

+ Lesion of the dorsal column in Tabes dorsalis (due to late stage of neurosyphilis) 

markedly affects Gracile and cuneate tracts. The patient’s gait is affected due to 

defective proprioception. This is due to progressive demyelination. 

2)Proprioceptive pathways to the subconscious level (Cerebellum): 

a) Dorsal spinocerebellar tract. 

b) Ventral spinocerebellar tract. 

c) Spino-olivary tract. 
d) Cuneo-cerebellar tract. 

Fig. 3.9: Proprioceptive Pathway 

Unconscious proprioception is carried to the cerebellum as follows: 

1) From 1st — 7th cervical segments, proprioception is carried by the cuneo-cerebellar tract, 

2) From 8th cervical segment to the 3rd lumbar segment (Clarke’s nucleus level), 

proprioception is carried by the dorsal spinocerebellar tract. 

3) Below the 3rd lumbar segment, proprioceptive impulses ascend with gracile tract till the 

Clarke’s nucleus, then it joins the dorsal spinocerebellar tract. 

4) Proprioception from lumbar, sacral and coccygeal segments is also carried by the ventral 

spinocerebellar tract. 

124



CHAPTER Iii: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

2) Descending tracts 
They are divided into: 

A) Pyramidal tract: (Fig. 3.10) which originates from the cerebral cortex. 
1- Lateral corticospinal tract: 

It descends in the lateral a, 

white funiculus of the 

spinal cord and extends to 

the most caudal part of the Fi : Pyramidal tracts control 
BK 

a, y voluntary movements of 
cord and progressively the muks cle 4 a -:  ¥ br = 1 

diminishes in size. QA C 

2- Ventral corticospinal tract: <</ | 
By porT 

It descends in the anterior 
white column of the spinal Fig. 3.10: Corticospinal tracts 

cord and extends only to the upper thoracic spinal cord levels and innervates the 
axial muscles of the upper extremities and neck. 

B) Extrapyramidal tracts; (Fig. 3.11) that originate from the brain stem nuclei. 
1) Rubrospinal tract. 

2) Tectospinal tract. 
3) Vestibulo-spinal tract. 

4) Reticulospinal tract (Medullary & Pontine) 
%* Medial longitudinal bundle: it descends in the ventral white column, where it forms 

a well-defined bundle in the cervical region. 

'* Muscle tone 

¢ Equilibrium 
's Coordination 

Fig 3.11: Extrapyramidal tracts 

125 

I a 



CHAPTER iii: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Table (3.6): showing site of long tracts in funiculi of the spinal cord 

Ascending Tracts Descending Tracts 

Dorsal Column -Gracile (all spinal cord) 
Cuneate (till To) 

Lateral column -Dorsal spinocerebellar (C8—L3) -Lateral corticospinal 
(Clarke's level) -Rubrospinal (cervical segments) 
-Ventral spinocerebellar -Medullary reticulospinal 
-Lateral spinothalamic 
-Spino-olivary 
-Spino-tectal 

Ventral column Ventral spinothalamic Ventral corticospinal (till T6) 
-MLB (In all segments) 
-Pontine reticulospinal 
-Tectospinal (cervical segments) 
-vestibulospinal tracts 

Short tracts of spinal cord 

They are present within the spinal cord for its connections. 
They are intersegmental and have associative and integrative 

functions. 
They are subclassified as: 
1-Association---—--connects the adjacent part of the same side 

2-Commissural —----connects opposite halves of spinal cord 

1- Comma shaped tract: 
It Lies between gracile and cuneate tracts. Present only in 

the upper half of the spinal cord. 
It represents the descending fibers from cuneate tract. 

2-Fasciculus proprius tract 
It surrounds the gray matter of the spinal cord. 
It originates and ends in the spinal cord. 
It interconnects the neurons at different spinal levels 

(coordination). 

3- Lissauer’s tract 
It extends from the tip of the dorsal horn to the surface of 

spinal cord. It contains: 
a) Lateral division of the dorsal root of spinal nerves. 

b) Fibers that connect different levels of substantia 

gelatinosa. 

126 



CHAPTER li: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

The fibers ascend and descend for few segments before termination on spinal cord laminae. 
e For: pain modulation. 
4- Septomarginal tract: 

It lies close to the dorsomedian septum in the lower half of spinal cord between gracile 
tracts. It represents the descending fibers from the gracile tract. 

Anterior white commissure (Fig. 3.12) 

-Lies in front of the gray commissure. 
-It is the site of crossing of the spinothalamic tracts. ATERCA WN 

Clinical application: Fig. 3.12: Anterior white commissure 
* [In syringomyelia (Dilatation of central canal) 

pressure affects the anterior white commissure. It commonly affects the cervical 
segments. So, symptoms are related to the spinothalamic tracts (pain, temperature 
& crude touch) while the dorsal column is spared. In progressive lesions, motor effects 
could occur due to damage of anterior horn cells or fibers of the corticospinal tract. 

* Table 3.7: Comparison between different segments of spinal cord 

Cervical Thoracic Lumbar Sacral 

Size Large Small Large Small 

Shape Oval Rounded Rounded Rounded 

Posterior horn | Thin Thin Thick Thick 

Anterior horn | Thick Thin Thick Thick 

Lateral horn No lateral horn Present in ‘upper two or ' No laters 
three segments | horn 

White matter | Greater in amount | Less than cervical | Less than cervical | Few 
Central canal | Anterior Shifted dorsally Central Central 

127 



CHAPTER ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Dorsal root ganglion 

Blah Spinal nerve 

0 A tLn AG == y 

Segment C, 
Ventral root 

Anterior median fissure 

White matter 

» . 

Gray matter 

128 



CHAPTER lit: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Stretch receptor’s structure 

These receptors are proprioceptors (Muscle spindle, Golgi tendon organ) 

1) Muscle spindles: Neuromuscular spindles. (Fig 3.13). 

Site: They are present in skeletal muscles, mare numerous in the muscles of the 

extremities and muscles of fine control as small muscles of the fingers. 

Microscopic structure: 

e¢ The muscle spindle is encapsulated and fusiform in shape (2-5 mm in length and 
0.2 mm in width at its middle). 

e It is longitudinally arranged parallel to the muscle fibers. 

e Each spindle contains 2-12 intrafusal muscle fibers. The ordinary muscle fibers 
situated outside the spindle are referred to as extrafusal muscle fibers. 

e The intrafusal fibers are characterized by: 
a) Smaller diameters. 

b) Indistinct striations. 
c) Non-contractile central portions. 

2 The intrafusal muscle fibers are surrounded by the tissue fluid occupying the 

expanded middle part of the spindle. They are attached at both ends to the 
epimysium or to the extrafusal muscle fibers. 

Fig. 3.13: L.S. of the muscle spindle 

Secondary i flerent 

Extrafusal 

muscle fibers 

20 a 0) gh Intrafusal 
xtrafusal ! J  » © 6 &B ey“  Nuclear muscle 

fibers ro 9s@.  0 ch 

7 + To : oe CT capsule 

Nuclear bag ©: 
"Nuclear chain 

Bi Wah s) 
yorA AAI 

129 



CHAPTER il: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Types of intrafusal fibers: 

1) Nuclear bag fibers. 2) Nuclear chain fibers: 
Table 3.8: The structural differences between the two types of the intrafusal muscle 

fibers by light microscope: 

Nuclear bag Nuclear chain 

Shape Thickandlong ~~ | Thinand short with uniform 

| diameter | 

Number Fewer in number BESTE | Numerous in number 

1-4in each spindle ‘utpo  10 in each spindle 
The nuclei | The central partis expanded, | The central part is narrow and 

‘non-contractile and contains | contains a chaof inucnlei in 

“numerous closely packed the central non-contractile 

nuclei. part ra : 

Innervation of the muscle spindle: 
A) Afferent innervation: 
1) The primary afferents: 

Each nuclear bag fiber and chain fiber receives a terminal branch of a large myelinated 

sensory fiber. This wind in a spiral form around the nuclear areas of both nuclear bag and 
the nuclear chain fibers, forming the annulospiral endings. 

2) The secondary afferents: 
Nuclear chain fibers receive terminal branches of smaller sensory fibers. These 

terminate on each side of the annulospiral ending in clusters known as flower spray endings 
or the secondary endings. 

B) Efferent innervations: 
The contractile parts of the intrafusal fibers of the spindle receive motor fibers which are 

small gamma fibers representing axons of gamma motor neurons. Stimulation of motor 

nerve causes both ends of intrafusal muscle fibers to contract and activate the sensory 

ending. 

The muscle spindles are stimulated by: 

a) Active stretch by contraction of the contractile parts of the intrafusal muscle fibers. 

b) Passive stretch when there is a pull on the tendon as in tendon reflexes e.g. knee jerk. 

This leads to an increase the rate of nerve impulses to the spinal cord and the brain. 

130 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

2) Golgi tendon organs (GTO): Neuro-tendinous organs. (Fig. 3.14) 
Sites: They are found at the junctions of the muscles with their tendons. 
Microscopic structure: 

e These are encapsulated receptors. Each has a thick lamellated capsule. The outermost layer 
continues in the perineural sheath. 

e Primary afferent fibers enter the capsule at its equatorial region, dividing into ascending 

and descending branches to give many unmyelinated branches to surround the collagen 
fibrils. No efferent innervation is present. 

Tendon organ detects changes in muscle tension. They provide CNS with information 

regarding muscle tension. 

Fig 3.14: Golgi tendon organ 

131 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

MUSCLE STRECH REFEX1&2 
Introduction: 

Two types of movement are performed by the body: 
1- Voluntary movement: It is a purposeful movement correctly ordered in time and space 

e.g. Walking. 
v' Types of voluntary movements: 

a. Fine when performed by distal limb muscles (e.g. fingers & hands muscles). 

b. Gross when performed by axial muscles (e.g. back muscles) and proximal limb 

muscles (e.g. muscles around elbow joint). 

¢. Learned skilled movements: i.e. composed of previous two movements. 

Reflex movement: 

A reflex is a subconscious response due to stimulation of receptors e.g. flexor withdrawal 

reflex 

Reflex arc: is the basic functional unit of the nervous system because it is the smallest, 

simplest unit capable of receiving a stimulus and producing a response. Therefore, we can 

learn much about nervous system functions by examining how reflex arcs receive stimuli 

and how reflex arcs produce responses. 

The reflex arc has five basic components (Fig. 3.15) : 

* 1- A sensory receptor 

2- A sensory neuron 

3- An integrating center 

4- A motor neuron 

5- An effector organ. 

Fig 3.15: components of reflex arc 

132 



CHAPTER III: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Reflexes are homeostatic responses. For example, autonomic reflexes are responsible for 

maintaining relatively constant functions of CVS (Blood pressure), Respiratory system (PCO; & 
P03), .....etc. Somatic reflexes which is either withdrawal reflex i.e. to remove the body away 
from painful stimuli or postural reflexes to maintain body posture against gravity. 

Reflexes vary in complexity. Reflexes are classified into: 
1. Monosynaptic reflexes: has one synapse e.g. muscle stretch reflex (MSR). 

2. Bi-synaptic reflex: has two synapses e.g. Golgi tendon organ (GTO). 
3. Polysynaptic reflexes: has more than two synapses e.g. withdrawal reflex. 

Many reflexes are integrated within the spinal cord, and others are integrated within the 
brain stem or other brain areas. In addition, higher brain centers affect reflexes by either 

suppressing or facilitating them. 

Muscle stretch reflex = Muscle spindle reflex {MSR)= Myotatic reflex 
It is the simplest body somatic reflex. 

Definition: reflex contraction of a muscle in response to a stretching force applied to it. 

Neural components of stretch reflex: 
Stimulus: mild or moderate stretch of a muscle. 
Receptor: Muscle spindle, which is encapsulated mechanoreceptor, consists of 2 types of 
intrafusal fibers. 

Afferent: 2 types of sensory neurons that arise from the center of each of the muscle spindles. 
Type la (Aa) rapidly conducting fibers and type Il fibers. 
Center: spinal cord, anterior horn cells. 

- No interneurons. 

- There is direct synapse between afferent neurons and the efferent neurons. 

- The stretch reflex is the only monosynaptic reflex in the body. 
Efferent: a motor neurons in the spinal (alpha motor neurons) 

Effector: ordinary, contractile skeletal muscle fibers (extrafusal fibers). 
Response: contraction of the muscle. 

Importance: It keeps the normal length of the muscle. Stretch (lengthening) of the muscle 
results in reflex muscle contraction so the muscle will be shortened and returns back to its 
normal length (i.e.) negative feedback reflex. 
Clinical importance: 

1- Examination of static stretch reflex activity (muscle tone). 

2- Examination of dynamic stretch reflex (deep reflex). 

3- Diagnosis of site and cause of neurological diseases. 

N.B.;: Myotatic: means tonic contraction of the muscle in response to stretch. 

133 



CHAPTER lll: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Muscle Stretch Reflex 
Sep 

Step1: 

[irate hang of 
muscle strnulsles 
rmuscio spindles 

Information processing 
O81 MOOT NOLINON 

Stop42 

Activation of 
MOTOr Neon 

Fig. 3.16: Components of muscle stretch reflex 

Muscle spindles 
General characters: 
Encapsulated mechanoreceptor present in the bulk of the muscle. It monitors the rate and 

the degree of muscle length changes. The ends of the capsule are attached to tendons of the 

muscle. Inside the capsule, there are 3-10 small, specialized skeletal muscle fibers called 

intrafusal fibers, which are positioned parallel to the extrafusal ordinary contractile fibers (Fig. 

3.17). 

S 

Fig 3.17: Intrafusal muscle fibers parallel to extrafusal muscle fibers 

134 

-«-o)Ba 

, 

— _— 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Intrafusal fibers: 

Are of 2 types, according to the shape of its central part and the distribution of nuclei: 
Table 3.9: Comparison between nuclear bag fibers and nuclear chain fibers 

1- Nuclear bag fibers 2- Nuclear chain fibers 

Central part contains large number of | Central part contains nuclei spreading like a 

nuclei like a bag. chain. 

1-3 fibers in each spindle 3-9 fibers in each spindle 
Each 1-3 fibers are attached to the sides of 
one nuclear bag fiber. 

Detect the velocity of change of muscle | Detect the degree of change of muscle 
length (rate detectors, Dynamic response). | length (Static response). 
Phasic receptor (stop discharge of impulses | Tonic receptor (does not stop discharge of 
during maintained stretch of the muscle) impulses during maintained stretch of the 

muscle) 

Innervation of the muscle spindle 
Sensory (afferent) neurons arise from the central receptor area of intrafusal fibers, while its 
peripheral contractile area is innervated by motor (efferent) neurons. 
1- Afferent nerves: 

- Sensory neurons innervate the non-contractile centers of the muscle spindle 
cells. 

- They are of two types: Primary afferent endings = type la fibers. 
Secondary afferent endings= type ll fibers. 

Table 3.10: Comparison between primary and secondary afferent endings 
Primary afferent endings Secondary afferent endings 

Annulo-spiral Flower spray 
Type la fibers Type ll fibers 
Around central parts of nuclear bag and | Around central parts of nuclear chain fibers 

chain fibers. only. 
Rapidly conducting Slowly conducting 
Acts with dynamic and static stimulation of | Acts only with static stimulation of the 
the receptor. receptor. 

Axons of these sensory neurons extend to the spinal cord and synapse directly with motor 
neurons that supply the extrafusa!l fibers of the same muscle. Some of them reach up to the 
cerebellum and the motor cortex (long loop) 

135 



CHAPTER Iii: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Diver Matthews, 1954 Afferents 

» 
1] 

70) 

Ton O00PRO6 ©) >a 0. 
Trail ending Nuclear chain fibre 

Fig. 3.18: Nuclear bag, nuclear chain fibers and their afferents 

2- Efferent innervation: 
a) Alpha motor neuron: innervates the extrafusal muscle fibers. 
b) Gamma motor neuron (y): innervate the peripheral contractile parts of the muscle 

spindle cells. 
- They are of two types: 

a- y dynamic fibers: They supply the peripheral contractile part of the nuclear 
bag fibers. 

b- vy static fibers: They supply the peripheral contractile part of the nuclear 
chain fibers. 

Causes of stimulation of the intrafusal fibers: 
Intrafusal fibers are stimulated only by stretch of the central non-contractile part, which 

occurs either by: 
1- Lengthening of the whole skeletal muscle. 
2- Contraction of the peripheral parts of the intrafusal fibers (i.e.) supra spinal gamma 

efferent stimulation. 
Maximal stimulation occurs when both occur at the same time. 
Properties of the stretch reflex: 

1- It is a spinal (its center is the spinal cord), deep reflex (its receptors are deep in the 

muscle) 
2- It is a monosynaptic reflex. 
3- It has shortest reflex time = synaptic delay = 0.3 — 0.5 msec 
4- It has no recruitment or after discharge. 
5- It shows reciprocal innervation (when the agonist contracts, this is accompanied by reflex 

relaxation of the antagonist through inhibitory interneurons). 

6- Its activity is controlled by higher centers changing the activity of y neurons. 
7- It is inhibited by: 

a- Active muscle contraction (silent period of muscle spindle) 
b- Stimulation of the stretch reflex of the antagonist muscle. 

c- Stimulation of Golgi tendon organ reflex (=inverse = negative stretch reflex). 

8- It is a semi quantitative reflex (could be diminished, lost or increased) 

Functional types of stretch reflex: 
Functionally, 2 types of stretch reflex are of physiological and clinical importance: 

1- Dynamic stretch reflex 

2- Static stretch reflex 

136 



CHAPTER Hil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Table 3.11: Comparison between dynamic and static stretch reflexes 
Dynamic stretch reflex Static stretch reflex 

Definition {It is reflex sudden tetanic | Itis a reflex maintained sub-tetanic 
(maximal) muscle contraction in | muscle contraction in response to 
response to sudden stretch maintained weak stretch 

Example | Tendon jerk Muscle tone 
Stimulus | Sudden rapid stretch Maintained weak stretch 
Receptor | Central parts of nuclear bag fibers | Central parts of nuclear chain fibers 

of muscle spindle. (rapidly | of muscle spindle. (slowly adapting) 
adapting) 

Afferent | Type la = primary nerve endings = | primary nerve endings and 

secondary nerve endings (Type li 
mainly). 

Center Anterior horn cells of the spinal | Anterior horn cells of the spinal 

cord. cord. 
Efferent Thick myelinated fibers of a motor | thick myelinated fibers of a motor 

neurons neurons 
Effector Extrafusal muscle fibers Extrafusal muscle fibers 
Response | Dynamic response. Rapid tetanic | Static response. continuous sub- 

contraction followed by rapid | tetanic contraction 
relaxation 

Duration | Very rapid Prolonged 

Functions of gamma (y) efferent fibers = (Effect of y efferent discharge): 

1- It maintains the muscle spindle sensitivity during contraction of the skeletal muscle. 
Stimulation of y efferent prevents unloading. 

- When the extrafusal fibers contract, the muscle becomes shortened, and this 
represents an external compression force on the muscle spindle, and so the 
muscle spindles passively shorten. This causes the muscle spindles to be less 
sensitive to stretch. 

- However, while alpha motor neurons are stimulating the muscle to contract, 
gamma motor neurons are stimulating contraction of the peripheral parts of 
muscle spindle, and this pulls on the central part of the muscle spindles and 
overcomes the external compression on the spindle. 

- This keeps the muscle spindle continue to send signals about the length of the 
muscle even during muscle contraction. 

137 



CHAPTER lil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Exirafusal fibers 
| 

Intrafusal fibers 
_l2a axon 

Activate 
alpha motor 

neuron 
EN 

Gamma molor 
neuron axon 

Alpha motor 
fiBuron axon 

Fig. 3.19: Effect of y motor neuron stimulation (unloading) 

2- Stimulation of y efferent results in reflex skeletal muscle contraction Fig. 3.20): 

stimulation of (y) efferent fibers causes contraction of the peripheral parts of the 

intrafusal fibers. This causes stretch of the central part, and subsequently, the pathway 

of stretch reflex is initiated, resulting in a reflex muscle contraction (reflex stimulation of 

alpha motor neuron). 
ii J Attairnpuet rfrdom  | 

sensory arfines of 
iniacle spineie fer 

—— Extratisal 

AES 

er Iniratusal 
muscle 
sande fw 

1 Gamma motor neuro 
ouput 10 conlrasllie end 
poring of somdie hber 

Fig. 3.20: Effect of y efferent stimulation = initiation of muscle contraction 

3- It is one of the sites subjected to higher supraspinal control on stretch reflex. 

138 



CHAPTER ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Functions of the stretch reflex 
(Role of the muscle spindle in voluntary motor activity) 
1- Skeletal muscle tone: 

Definition: It is a state of sub-tetanic continuous contraction of skeletal muscle affects 
mainly antigravity muscles. 
Causes: 
It is the static component of the stretch reflex. The muscle is subjected to partial 
maintained stretch all the time, and so its response is sub-tetanic maintained contraction 
(muscle tone). This partial maintained stretch is due to: 
- The distance between the origin and the insertion of the skeletal muscle is longer 

than its original length. 
- Effect of gravity that stretches mainly the antigravity muscles (flexors of upper limbs, 

extensors of lower limbs, extensors of back of neck, extensors of back of trunk and 
elevators of the lower jaw), therefore the tone is higher in the antigravity muscles. 

- Continuous vy static efferent discharge, which leads to continuous stretch of nuclear 
chain fibers. 

Pathway: The pathway of static stretch reflex. 
Functions of muscle tone: 
1- Maintains the body posture against the effect of gravity. 
2- Gives postural background needed to support the body during voluntary 

movements. 
3- Maintains heat production thus regulating body temperature. 
4- Maintains venous return and lymphatic drainage especially in muscles of lower 

limbs. 
5- Keeps the viscera in position by tone of anterior abdominal wall muscles. 
Muscle tone is not accompanied by fatigue because: 
1- it is due to alternate contraction of different muscle fibers. 
2- Contraction is sub-tetanic. 
3- Muscle fibers involved in muscle tone are the red, slow, oxidative muscle fibers, 

which are rich in mitochondria, myoglobin and capillaries. They contract slowly and 
can sustain force in muscle for a long time. 

Servo-assistant function = (force regulation): 
Stretch reflex assists voluntary movements (servo-assist voluntary movements). This is 
explained by a -y co- activation.: 
a -y co- activation: during voluntary contraction, supraspinai facilitatory impulses 
activate both (a) and (y) neurons. The activated (a) neurons produce contraction of 
extrafusal fibers of the involved muscle. At the same time, the activated (y) neurons 
produce contraction of the peripheral parts of intrafusal fibers to prevent unloading, and 
thus keeps the central receptor part of intrafusal fibers sensitive to stretch even during 
shortening (contraction) of extrafusal fibers {Fig. 3.21a). 

139 



CHAPTER li: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

- 

aingl 
Fig. 3.21: Servo-assistance function of muscle stretch reflex. 

If the load, carried by the muscle is increased, it results in stretch of the muscle, both 

extrafusal and intrafusal fibers become stretched (Fig. 3.21b). 
Because the central receptor part of intrafusal fibers sensitive to stretch even during 

muscle contraction, its stretch by the increased load leads to its stimulation and 

increased discharge of impulses in type la afferents. The increased la afferents discharge 

rate leads to more activation of (a) motor neurons, with subsequent increase in the force 

of extrafusal fibers contraction to adjust the muscle force according to the increased 

load (Fig. 3.21c). 
This function of stretch reflex is helpful in the following conditions: 
a) Allow the nervous system to produce strong contraction with minimal nervous 

energy (i.e.) energy saving. 
b) Application of heavy weights to the muscle with stabilization of limb position (load 

reflex), (i.e.) ability of the muscle to maintain a constant position despite application 

of different weights. 
c) Compensate for muscle weakness or muscle fatigue or failure of the muscle to 

contract in adequate force. 
3- Damping action: 

- This means smoothness of voluntary movements or signal averaging function of 

stretch reflex. 
- Signals from the higher centers discharged to the motor neurons of the spinal cord, 

and then to the muscle are often of varying intensities, that may be in excess or less 

140 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

than needed. For example, signals are increasing in intensity for a few milliseconds, 
then decreasing in intensity, then changing to another intensity level, and so forth, 
and therefore would lead to oscillating irregular movements. 

- However, through muscle spindle and alpha-gamma linkage, stretch reflex prevents 
the oscillation or jerkiness of the voluntary movements, and adjust signals to 
produce smooth regular movements 

- When the muscle spindle and its afferent and efferent neurons are not functioning 
well, the muscle contraction is jerky during the course of such a signal (Fig. 3.22) 

Stimulus 
(8 per second) 

=. 

ye - 

= 
oO v b- LJ => v = 

Fig. 3.22: Curve A, in a normal muscle, and curve B, in a muscle whose muscle spindles 
were denervated by section of the posterior roots of the cord 82 days previously. Note the 

smoothing effect of the muscle spindle reflex in curve A 

4- Examination of stretch reflex is of clinical value. 
a) The presence of the normal stretch reflex response indicates: 

1. The muscle spindle, afferent (sensory) and efferent (motor) neurons, 
neuromuscular junctions, and the muscle are working well. 

2. An appropriate balance of excitatory and inhibitory inputs from the higher brain 
levels. 

3. The integrity of the vertebral segments of the spinal cord. 
b) Localization of site and cause of neurological disease: if the biceps jerk (C5 & 6) is 

intact and triceps jerk (C6 & 7) is lost this means lesions is in spinal segment 7. 
c) Deep reflex examination give idea about the tone of the muscle. As hyperreflexia 

accompany hypertonia while hyporeflexia accompany hypotonia. 
Supra spinal regulation of the stretch reflex 

Normally the anterior horn cells particularly y motor neurons receive impulses from many 
supraspinal centers, through descending nervous tracts. 
These higher supraspinal centers send either excitatory impulses or inhibitory impulses to 
affect the level of excitability and function of the spinal cord motor neurons (mainly y 
motor neurons), and subsequently affect the activity of the muscle spindle and the stretch 
refiex. 

The general effects of this supraspinal control on stretch reflex is summarized in table 3.9 

141 

Force of contraction 



CHAPTER lI: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Table 3.12: Comparison between facilitatory centers and inhibitory centers 

Facilitatory centers Inhibitory centers 

1- Motor area (4) primary motor area 1- Cortical suppressor areas (4s,6) (through 
(through stimulation of facilitatory stimulating inhibitory reticular 
reticular formation) formation). 

2- Facilitatory (pontine) reticular 2- Inhibitory (medullary) reticular 
formation, it has an intrinsic activity it formation, it has no intrinsic activity, so 

sends its impulses through the it is activated by other centers, it sends 
(ventral reticulo- spinal tract). its impulses through lateral reticulospinal 

tract 

3- Vestibular nucleus through 3- Red nucleus through rubrospinal tracts. 
vestibulospinal tract 

4- Caudate nucleus of basal ganglia 4- Lentiform nucleus of basal ganglion 
through pontine reticular formation. through medullary reticular formation. 

5- Cerebro-cerebellum 5- Spino-cerebellum 

The overall activity of the centers is inhibiting muscle tone, being higher in antigravity 
muscles during standing 

Fig. 3.23 : A diagram showing the balance between the facilitatory and inhibitory centers 
affecting y motor neurons {Green are facilitatory while Red are inhibitory centers) 

142 



CHAPTER lil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

OTHER REFLEXES 

Golgi tendon organ reflex (GTO (Fig. 3.24 & 3.25) 

= Inverse stretch reflex = autogenic inhibition reflex 

Definition: It is reflex skeletal muscle relaxation in response to an increase in the muscle 
tension. 
Stimulus: increase in muscle tension by: 

1. Increase active tension by isometrically contracted muscle. 
2. Increase passive tension by excessive stretch of the muscle beyond physiologic limit. 

The GTO is more sensitive to increased active tension (isometric contraction), than to 
increased passive tension {severe stretch). 

Receptors: GTO is a proprioceptive receptor, which is an encapsulated network of nerve 
endings twisted throughout the collagen fibers in the tendon of the muscle. Golgi tendon 
organs are arranged in series 
with the extrafusal muscle fibers. They act as tension detectors. 

Muscle _ 
fibers = 

Capsule Ib Afferent fiber 

It afferent 
EUuron 

GTO = 

Collagen 

Fig. 3.24: Golgi tendon organ Fig. 3.25: Inverse stretch reflex pathway 
Afferent: Group Ib fibers. These afferents have their cell bodies in the dorsal root ganglia, and 
they project into the spinal cord. 
Center: Alpha motor neuron (AHCs) where afferents (lb) synapse with an inhibitory 
interneuron that makes an inhibitory synapse with the alpha motor neuron that innervates 
the same muscle from which the Ib afferent fiber arises. 
Efferent: Alpha motor neuron (AHCs). 
Effector organ: Extrafusal fibers of the skeletal muscle. 
Response: Muscle relaxation. 
Functions of inverse stretch reflex: 

1- Protection of muscles and tendons from damage caused by excessive tension. It act as a 
negative feedback to relax the muscle when tension increased maximally with heavy 
weight (isometric contraction) and prevent its tear. 

143 



CHAPTER lil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

2- Equalize contractile force among the muscle fibers. Those fibers that exert excess tension 

become inhibited by the reflex, whereas those that exert too little tension become more 

excited because of absence of reflex inhibition. 
- If some muscle fibers are performing more work than others, their tension is more 

increased and their Golgi tendon organs will be more stimulated. This stimulation of 

the GTO of some fibers results in partial inhibition of the contraction of those fibers. 

As a result, GTO reflex helps to spread the amount of work evenly across the entire 

muscle, so that all motor units are working efficiently. 
- About 10-15 muscle fibers are usually connected to each Golgi tendon organ thus 

there are multiple Golgi tendon organs in each tendon. Each organ is stimulated when 

its small muscle bundle is tensed by contraction or over stretch. Thus, the GTO reflex 
is involved in motor control under normal conditions. 

Table 3.13: Differences between muscle spindle and Golgi tendon organ 

Muscle spindle Golgi tendon organ 

Deep receptors found in Deep receptors found in 
Site fleshy muscle fibers (in tendons of muscles (in series 

parallel) with muscle) 

Structure Intrafusal fibers. Encapsulated eto of 
| knobby nerve endings. 

Stimulus Muscle stretch Increase muscle tension 

Response Muscle contraction. Muscle relaxation. 

Synapse Monosynaptic reflex Bi-synaptic reflex 

Two types, primary endings a 
Afferent and Secondary ending 1 Only one afferent (type Ib). 

Type of reflex Stretch reflex Inverse stretch reflex 
produced 

Function Supportive Protective 

Flexor withdrawal reflex {Protective Reflex, Fig. 3.26): 

Definition: It is reflex flexion and withdrawal of a limb from a painful stimulus. 
Stimulus: Painful stimuli (noxious stimulus, injurious stimulus). 
Afferents: AS and C afferents (pain afferents). 
Center: Alpha motor neuron (AHCs), it has more than 2 synapses (Polysynaptic reflex). 
Efferent: Anterior horn cell (alpha motor neuron) of the flexor muscles. 
Effector: Extrafusal fibers of flexor muscles. 
Response: flexion and withdrawal of the limb from the painful stimulus. 
Aim: withdrawal of the body parts from painful stimuli for protection of the body. 

144 



CHAPTER Iii: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Properties of flexor withdrawal reflex: 
1- lt is initiated by injurious stimuli 
2- Impulses are transmitted by Ad & C fibers. 
3- Polysynaptic reflex (long central delay of conduction) 
4- Irradiation: a very strong stimulus causes stimulation of much receptors in many adjacent 

receptive fields. This leads to discharge of impulses in many afferents that spread the 
excitatory impulses up and down to many segments in the spinal cord. This leads to 
increased numbers of active spinal segments, numbers of active motor neurons, and 
greater response (e.g. stepping on sharp object by right foot lead to flexion on ankle, knee 
and even hip joints.) 

5- Reverberating circuit between the interneurons results in prolonged after discharge to 
maintain muscle contraction for some time after removal of the stimulus. 

6- Reciprocal innervation: Collateral branches from the afferent neuron carrying the painful 
stimuli synapse with inhibitory interneurons that inhibit the motor neurons of the 
antagonistic muscles. This helps in unopposed action of the agonist muscles. 

wolgktahdis kp loM lag 
Fling OGriraot, ht 

Flaeors syhilpit ec 

a 
== 

7 Ale 
Fig. 3.26: Pathway of withdrawal reflex due to injurious stimulus of right foot and crossed 

extensor reflex in left limb. 

Crossed extensor reflex (Supportive Reflex): 

Definition: lt is reflex contraction and extension of the limb, in response to application of a 
painful stimulus to the opposite limb. 
Stimulus: Painful stimuli of the opposite limb {contralateral painful stimulus). 
Afferents: Ad and C afferents (pain afferents). 
Center: Alpha motor neuron (AHCs), where afferents synapse with an intersegmental 
interneuron that transmits impulses to the opposite side of the spinal cord. 
Efferent: Alpha motor neurons (AHCs) of the extensor muscles. 
Effector: Extrafusal fibers of extensor muscles. 
Response: Extension of the limb. 

145 



CHAPTER lll: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Function: When one lower limb is withdrawn from a painful stimulus, the other limb extends 

to prevent falling down. 
Properties of Crossed extensor reflex: 

- This reflex is associated with the flexor withdrawal reflex of the other limb. 
- Long latent period due to large numbers of interneurons involved in the reflex. 
- Long after discharge. 

Superficial reflexes 

Body superficial reflexes are induced by stimulation of receptors in the skin and special sense 

organs. 
General characters of body superficial reflexes: 
Stimulus: Scratch of the skin. 
Receptors: Superficial receptors. 
Afferents: Sensory neurons that enter the spinal cord through dorsal Root. 
Center: Spinal cord segments. 
Efferent: Alpha motor neurons that leave the spinal cord through ventral horn, 
Effector: Extrafusal fibers of a muscle. 
Response: Muscle contraction. 

- In addition to LMN (a neuron that carry motor impulses from the spinal cord, or from the 
nuclei of motor cranial nerves to the muscle). upper motor neuron (UMN, a neuron that 

carry motor impulses from the brain to the spinal cord, or the nuclei of motor cranial 
nerves) is also essential for normal occurrence of superficial reflexes. 

- In contrast, deep reflexes do not require UMN for them to occur. Deep reflexes are 

regulated, not initiated, by the UMN:S. 
1. Abdominal superficial reflexes (Fig. 3.27) 

Stimulus: Scratching the skin of abdominal wall from outward and towards the umbilicus 
by a blunt object. 
Afferent: Sensory neurons that enter the spinal cord through dorsal root. 
Center : Spinal segments T6-T9 for epigastric reflexes, spinal segments T9 - T12 for 

abdominal reflexes. 
Efferent: Alpha motor neurons (AHCs) 
Response: contraction of abdominal wall muscles resulting in shifting of the umbilicus to 
the opposite direction of the scratch. 
-This reflex is under the control of higher centers so it is lost in lesion of upper motor 

neuron. 

Fig. 3.27: Superficial abdominal reflex 

146 



CHAPTER lll: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

2. Plantar superficial reflex (Fig. 3.28) 
Stimulus: Scratching the lateral side of the sole from the heal to the base of toes by blunt 
object e.g. key 
Afferent: Sensory neurons that enter the spinal cord through dorsal horn. 
Center: Spinal segments S1 & S2 
Efferent: Alpha motor neurons (ACs). 
Response: plantar flexion of all toes 

Positive Babinski’ sign: dorsiflexion of big toe and fanning of the lateral toes. It appears 
either in physiological or pathological conditions. 

e Physiological conditions: 
- Deepsleep, general anesthesia and infancy below one year as the pyramidal tract 

neurons (UMN) is not myelinated yet. 
- in all these conditions, the response is termed “Pseudo positive Babinski’s sign”. 

¢ Pathological conditions: 
- Deep Coma 
- Upper motor neuron lesions: fanning of lateral toes and dorsiflexion of big toe. 
- Partial Positive Babinski’ sign: either dorsiflexion of big toe only in lesion in 

motor area 4; Or fanning of lateral toes only in lesion in area 6. 

NORMAL RESPONSE 

STIMULUS — 
TO SKIN 

OF FOOT 

(ABDUCTION) 
OF OTHER 

Fig. 3.28: Planter Reflex 

Anterior horn cell and motor function: 
Cells of the anterior horn of the spinal cord are classified into: 

I- Anterior motor neurons. 
lI- interneurons. 
i- Anterior motor neurons: 

1- Alpha motor neurons: it is called (AHCs). They are considered as the final common 
path for skeletal muscle contraction, which means that any type of skeletal muscle 
contraction (voluntary and reflex contraction) is performed through activation of alpha 
motor neurons. 
Arrangement of a motor neurons: 
- Inthe anterior horn, a motor neurons controlling axial muscles lie medial to those 

controlling distal muscles and a motor neurons controlling flexors lie dorsal to 
those controlling extensors. 

- a motor neurons that control proximal and distal muscles are found mainly in the 
cervical and lumbosacral segments of the spinal cord. 

- In the thoracic segments below T1, the AHCs are associated only with axial muscle 

147 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Ventral horn 

Proximal<, 

— a Bn, © 
al 

v 
rie 

Fig. 3.29:Arrangement of a motor neuron in anterior horn of spinal cord 

v' The motor unit {Fig. 3.30) is a single a motor neuron and all of the muscle fibers it 
innervates. 
- The motor unit for muscles that perform fine movements (eye muscles) consists 

of a single a motor neuron and 3-6 fibers innervated by this neuron (low 
innervation ratio). 

- The motor unit for muscles that perform powerful but gross movement (large leg 
and arm muscles) consists of a single a motor neuron and 200-300 fibers 
innervated by this neuron (high innervation ratio). 

v' The motor neuron pool is the group of AHCs that innervate a single muscle, and this 

pool may extend over several segments of the spinal cord e.g. The motor neuron pool 

of quadriceps muscle is the alpha motor neuronesinl 2, 3 & 4. 
v' Alpha motor neurons respond to and controlled by inputs from three sources: 

1- Nerve endings of sensory neurons in dorsal root ganglia. 
2- Interneurons (cells that do not project out of the area). 
3- Projections from higher centers such as the brain stem. 

One smaurscio may have 
TRETIYyY rotor units of 

Fig. 3.30 : Motor unit 

2- Gamma motor neurons: 
Small cell bodies and axons are interspersed with alpha motor neurons. They innervate 
the intrafusal fibers (muscle spindle). 

148 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Table 3.14: Differences between alpha and gamma motor neurons 

Alpha motor neurons Gamma motor neurons 

Number Gh cianteriormotor 35% of anterior motor neurons 
gnedrons i an 

Origin Large AHCs 3 Rpg | ; 3 Small AHCs 
Size large (9-20um) | Smaller (4-8 um) 

Innervates Extrafusal contractile fibers P orippiefel . Dyitracrig parts of 
| | < aR intrafusal fibers 

Types One type Two types (dynamic and static) 
N.B.: 
a) There is a-y linkage. 
b) y motor neurons is responsible for muscle tone and its supraspinal control. 

3- Interneurons: 
They are small, numerous, highly excitable, locally projecting neurons, i.e. their axons 
do not leave the gray matter of the spinal cord. 
Most of them are inhibitory e.g. 

Renshaw inhibitory cell (Fig. 3.31): 
- A small inhibitory interneuron in the anterior horn (Glycine is its inhibitory 
transmitter). 

- It is stimulated by a collateral branch from the axon of active alpha motor neuron, 
which releases acetylcholine to excite Renshaw cell. 

- Activated Renshaw act to: 
e A negative feedback effect of the Em mh. 

active alpha motor neuron, to (glycine) Ghnamate) 

limit the excess activity and 
prevent over excitation of motor 
neurons. 

e |nhibition of the surrounding 
alpha motor neurons, to focus 
the motor activity and sharpen 
the effect of the active alpha | 
motor neuron. % 

e To sharpen and localize the 

response and prevent oscillation Fig. 3.31: Renshaw cells producing 
by inhibition of antagonist negative feedback 

muscle. 

149

a — a 



CHAPTER li: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

MOTOR CORTEX FUNCTION 

e Most of voluntary movements initiated by cerebral cortex occur when the cortex activates 

patterns of function (programs of movements) stored in lower brain areas e.g. brainstem, 

basal ganglia and cerebellum. These centers send specific control signals to anterior motor 

neurons of spinal cord that control muscle. 

The motor cortex is the part of the cerebral cortex responsible for motor functions. It is located 

in front of the central sulcus {precentral) in the frontal lobe. It is subdivided into: 

|- Motor area 4 “Primary motor area, M1”. 
{l- Motor area 6 “Premotor area” 
IH- Supplementary Motor Area = Medial Area 6 
IV- Some specialized areas of motor control. 

I Primary 

Fig. 3.32: Motor cortex 

I- Motor area 4 “Primary motor area, M1" 
Site: precentral area in the frontal lobe. 
Body representation: 
a) Somatotopic representation (Topographical Representation): 

v' Crossed and Inverted: 
- Body representation is mainly contralateral; representation of muscles on the 

right side of the body is found in area 4 on the left cerebral hemisphere. 

- However, the exception is that muscles of respiratory and abdominal muscles 
are bilaterally represented. 

- Head muscles is bilaterally represented except muscles of the lower part of 

the face and tongue muscle which is unilaterally represented. 
v' It controls: 

1. Opposite side body muscles. 
2. Respiratory and abdominal muscles of both sides 
3. Upper half of face muscles of both sides. 

150



CHAPTER Iii: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

- It is inverted which means that the body is represented upside-down with the 
exception of the head which is not inverted (eyebrows upward, lips are 
downward). The face and mouth downwards near the Sylvian fissure, the arm 
and hand area in mid-portion of the primary motor cortex; the trunk near the 
apex of the brain; and the legs and feet in the part that dips in the longitudinal 
fissure). 

Fig. 3.33: Representation of different body muscles in primary motor cortex 

b) Motor representation: 
v' Area of representation is proportional to the skilled movement produced, not to 

the actual size of body muscles. e.g. finger and tongue muscles are represented 
by a large cortical area in area 4, while back muscles heave a small area of cortical 
representation. 

Characters of area 4: 
- Contains the large cortical Betz cells, which are highly excitable cells. 
- Betz cells are of 2 types: 

a- Dynamic: discharge at the start of voluntary movements, for initiation and 
direction of movement. 

b- Static: discharge all through the voluntary movements, for maintenance of 
movement. 

Connections of area 4: 
1- To AHCs and cranial nerve nuclei through both corticospinal and corticobulbar tracts. 

It is the main origin of pyramidal tract. 
2- To Area 6. 
3- To neocerebellum of the opposite site. 
4- Basal ganglia. 

15] 



CHAPTER lll: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Effect of lesions of area 6: 
The following manifestations occur on the opposite site of the body: 
1-  Paresis i.e weakness of voluntary movements but not paralysis. 
2- Motor apraxia (inability to do skilled motor act in absence of paralysis). 
3- Increased muscle tone (Spasticity hypertonia). 
4-  Hyperreflexia. 
5- Reappearance of grasp reflex. 
6- Partial +ve Babinski’s sign: Fanning of outer four toes. 
7- Loss of automatic associated movements (e.g. swinging of arms). 

Specialized Areas nearT he Premotor Cortex 
They are four important motor areas that lies very near to premotor cortex. 
1- Area for Hand Skills (Exner’s area): 

v It controls complex skilled hand movements e.g. sharpening of pencil or 
drawing figures. 

v' Its lesion causes Agraphia (hand movement become uncoordinated, and 
purposeful, and there is inability to write or draw but use hands for other 
purposes). 

2- Head Rotation Area: 
v It directs the head towards different visual objects. 

3- “Voluntary” Eye Movement Area (Frontal eye Field Area 8): 
v' it gives origin to cortico-nuclear tract of both sides, which is responsible for 

voluntary conjugate deviation of both eyes to opposite side. 
v' Its lesion causes loss of voluntary ability to produce conjugate eye movement 
v' This is transient because the tectospinal tract compensates and the reflex 

conjugate eye movements return. 
4- Motor speech area (Broca's Area): Words Formation Area (area 44): 

v' It stores the complex sequence of orders for vocalization. 
v' Its lesion causes motor aphasia (inability to speak whole words except simple 

ones as yes or no). 

Ii- SupplementMaotroyr Area 
Site: as mentioned in anatomy. 
Body representation: Horizontal and Bilateral representation of body muscles. 
Functions: 
1- It supplements (helps) area 6 in the control of voluntary movements of the proximal 

parts of the body (especially internal directed movements) as a background for finer 
hand or feet movements. 

2- It is involved in planning and programming of movements, especially complex and 
bilateral movements before they start. 

Effect of lesions of Supplementary Motor Area: 
Its lesions lead to: 
1- Inability to perform complex movements. 
2- Inability to direct and coordinate the hands correctly during bilateral hand 

movements. 

153 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Motor Hierarchy 
Generation of voluntary movement 
e Voluntary movements are motions carried out when the nervous system and muscle work 

together. Voluntary movements are either 
a) Fine movement: like painting & drawing. It is usually performed by distal limb muscles 

(e.g. finger muscles). It is the responsibility of motor area 4 so if area 4 is damaged it 

causes permanent loss (paralysis) of fine movement. 
b) Gross movement: like walking & standing. It is usually performed by proximal and axial 

muscles (e.g. back muscles). It is the responsibility of area 4 and 6 so lesion in any of 

them cause weakness or paresis. 
c¢) Skilled movements: which are both fine and gross movements. 

Motor hierarchy (Fig. 3.37) 
It is the Information flow through the motor system. 
The control of movement by the central nervous system is a complicated process that involves 

multiple regions of the brain. Although specific regions of the brain, called the motor cortex, 

is believed to be responsible for the body motor functions, almost all of the neocortex 

becomes engaged during the control of voluntary movement. 

In general, the motor hierarchy is classified into: 
1) Higher motor levels: responsible for generation of the idea of voluntary movement. 

- Association areas in the cortex. 
2) Intermediate motor levels: responsible for planning and programming of voluntary 

movement (convert idea into a plan). 
- The motor cortex, Basal ganglia and Cerebellum. 

3) Lower motor levels: responsible for execution of voluntary movement (sending orders to 

the skeletal muscles involved in the performance of voluntary movement). 

- The brain stem and the spinal cord. 

PLANNING INITIATING EXECUTING 
MOVEMENT MOVEMENT MOVEMENT 

| Cerebellum) =~ 

— = — ES — =m 

Fig. 3.34: Motor Hierarchy 

154 

almery BE  canna” 



TE — 

CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Consider some of the key components of a goal directed movement: 
To carry out goal-directed movements: 

1) The idea is initiated in prefrontal cortex. 
2) The idea is converted into initial decision {or may be ignored) in the limbic association 

areas. 
3) Association areas collect various kinds of information from the various lobes of the 

brain e.g. the frontal lobe, about memories of past strategies and from the temporal 
lobe about motivation. 

4) The posterior parietal cortex (area 5,7) evaluates the body position in space and the 
surrounding environment through somatosensory, proprioceptive, and visual sensory 
inputs (evaluation of the current body position before planning of the movement). 

5) The idea is then converted into a plan or a program as follows: 
a) Premotor cortex (PMC) and supplementary motor areas (SMA) determine how the 

actions will be carried out, and decides which group of muscles to contract, and their 
sequence of contraction to result in the required movement. 

b) The basal ganglia and neocerebelflum share in planning by sequencing and storage of 
learned movements. 

6) The plan must be changed into motor orders i.e. Executed 
This is pure function of the primary motor cortex, which, together with the PMC and SMA, 
contributes most of the axons of the descending corticospinal tract. So, the brain signals 
pass down to the spinal cord, and then to the muscles to convert the plan into an actual 
movement. 

7) Feedback circuits: vision and spino-cerebellum monitor the performance of the 
movement. 

- If an error in performance is detected, they send corrective signal to the 
motor cortex, which then send impulses to the spinal cord for correction of 
movement. 

e Cerebral blood flow (CBF): is an essential determinant of brain function. Cerebral blood 
flow supplies oxygen, glucose and nutrients, and removes CO;, lactic acid & metabolites. 

eo Cerebral arteries: Brain is supplied by 4 arteries; 2 Internal carotid arteries and 2 vertebral 
arteries. These arteries are interconnected in brain to form an arterial circle {circle of Willis, 
COW) below the hypothalamus. From COW, 6 large vessels originate which supply the 
cerebral cortex. Although the circle has anastomosis channels, normally they do not permit 
a very large flow. 

e Cerebral capillaries: are non-fenestrated capillaries (Capillaries in choroid plexus are 
fenestrated) with tight junctions between endothelial cells. They are the basis for blood 
brain barrier (BBB), and are characterized by limited diffusion & vesicular transport. 

e Venous drainage of the brain occurs through cerebral veins, which drain to cerebral venous 
sinuses and then to internal jugular veins 

155 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

e Brain blood supply is 750 mi/min (54 ml/100 gm/min) = ~ 14% of cardiac output. Oxygen 
supply is 46 ml/min (3.3 ml/100gm/min) =~ 18% of total body O02 consumption 

Determinants of cerebral blood flow: 
CBF is relatively constant all the time. However, marked local fluctuations in CBF occur with 
changes in local activity of brain areas. 
CBF is regulated by: 
- Cerebral perfusion pressure 
- Cerebral vascular resistance 
Cerebral Perfusion Pressure (CPP): 

v' is the net pressure gradient causing blood flow to the brain. 
v' CPP = mean arterial pressure (MAP) — mean cerebral venous pressure (MCVP). 
v' The MCVP = intracranial pressure (ICP). So, CPP = MAP — ICP. 
v' Any increase in CPP causes an increase in CBF. 
v’ Any factor affecting MAP (e.g. hemorrhage) or ICP will affect the CBF. 

CBF is maintained normal over a wide range of MAP by ‘autoregulation’ 

Regulation of CBF: 
Autoregulation 
Metabolic mediators and chemo-regulation 
Neural control 

Autoregulation is a property that maintains constant blood flow to the brain despite wide 

fluctuations in MAP. It maintains cerebral blood flow constant in the range of 50 — 150 mm Hg 
MAP. It is explained by: 

- Myogenic property of cerebral vessels: 
Increase ABP produces vasoconstriction of cerebral vessels, to prevent a sudden increase 

in CBF, and vice versa. 
- Metabolic theory: decrease CBF leads to cerebral ischemia and accumulation of 

vasodilator metabolites (hypercapnia, hypoxia, increase H*, increase adenosine) that lead 
to vasodilatation of cerebral vessels to return CBF back to normal. 

Role of ICP in maintaining CBF: 
According to Monro-Kellie doctrine, the volume of blood, spinal fluid, and brain in the 

cranium (closed space in a solid skull) at any time must be relatively constant. So, an increase 
in ICP results in a decrease in CBF, and vice versa. 

Cushing’s reflex: Increase intracranial pressure (brain tumor) leads to a decrease in CBF. This 
leads to ischemia of VMC and sympathetic stimulation in an attempt to increase the ABP to 
increase the CBF back. 

156 



CHAPTER Hl: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

DESCENDING MOTOR TRACT FUNCTIONS 

Performing voluntary contraction: performing learned fine skilled movements need intact: 

1) Upper motor neurons (UMNSs): neurons from the cerebral cortex and terminate either 
in spinal cord (corticospinal tract) or brain stem nuclei ( corticobulbar and cortico- 
nuclear tracts ). 

2) Lower motor neurons (LMNs): neurons from anterior horn cells (AHCs) in the spinal 
cord and terminate at skeletal muscles of body (alpha motor neuron). or start from the 
brain stem to supply muscles of face and eyes (cranial nerves). 

Pyramidal tract 

v' It is well-developed in humans and it goes directly from the motor cortex to the AHCs or 
the nuclei of the cranial nerves. 

v' It is composed of about one million fibers and only 60% of them are myelinated. This 
myelination becomes complete after one year from birth. 

v" ltis so called because some fibers arise from the pyramidal {or Betz) cells present in the 
motor area 4. 

Origin and course: refer to anatomy lecture 

v' All cranial nerves nuclei have double innervation (from the same and opposite sides), 
except the lower part of fascial nucleus {supplying lower quadrant of the face) and the 
hypoglossal nucleus (supplying the tongue muscles) is innervated from the opposite side 
fibers only. 

Cortico-bulbar tract 

® Upper face 

\ Te Lower face 

Cranial nerve 
nuclei ¥II 

Fig. 3.35: Corticobalbar tract innervating the fascial nucleus 

Functions of the Pyramidal tract: 
1. Lateral tract controls fine skilled movements especially in the distal joints as | 

those of the fingers, toes and face e.g. writing, typing, piano playing 
2. Ventral tract shares with extrapyramidal tract to control gross movement and 

postural adjustment as a background for skilled movement performance. 
3. Uncrossed to abdominal and respiratory muscles 
4. lt is facilitatory to the superficial and deep reflexes. 
5. It inhibits the primitive withdrawal reflex (Babiniski's sign). 
N.B.: The corticobulbar tract (from frontal eye field area= area 8) controls conjugate 
eye movements. 

157 | 



CHAPTER Iii: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Extrapyramidal Tracts 

The term extrapyramidal motor system has been used to denote all the portions of the brain 

and brain stem that contribute to motor control but are not part of pyramidal tract: 

Pathway: refer to anatomy lecture 

B.: 
- extrapyramidal fibers originate from the cerebral motor cortex and end on basal ganglia, 

thalamus & substantia nigra, red nucleus, tectum (superior & inferior colliculi), 

vestibular nucleus, pontine and medullary reticular formation and inferior olivary 

nuclei 
- the output from the previous areas descend to supply the gamma cells (mainly) as well 

as alpha motor neurons. They are divided into medial and lateral brain stem pathways. 

¢ Functions: 
1) Control gross movements of muscle groups like the axial (trunk) and the proximal limb 

muscles e.g. running, bicycling or swimming but not skilled ones. 

2) Provide postural background (positions of the trunk and proximal joints) that help 

skilled movements and body equilibrium. 
3) With its association with basal ganglia, it is responsible for subconscious associated 

movements e.g. swinging of the arms during walking and facial expressions. 

4) Regulation of muscle tone, some are facilitatory while the others are inhibitory( as 

mentioned in supraspinal control of stretch reflex). 
5) In selective lesion of corticospinal tract, rubrospinal tract can control fine discrete 

movements in wrist joint (but that of fingers are impaired). 
6) Medial TST is concerned with reflex turning of the head to the sound, while lateral TST 

is concerned with eye protective reflexes (e.g. lid closure, raising arms & hands to 

protect the eyes) and it is concerned with reflex turning of the head in response to 

visual stimuli. 
7) Vestibulospinal tracts activate motor neurons of antigravity muscles (eg, proximal limb 

extensors) to control posture and balance. 
8) Control of autonomic functions: many descending tracts that control important 

autonomic functions are considered as a part of this system e.g. 

a. Respiratory system: from the respiratory center to AHCs of respiratory muscles 

b. Vasomotor tract: from VMC to LHCs in thoraco-lumbar region. 

c. sweat secretion (from heat regulating center in the hypothalamus). 

158 



CHAPTER iil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Table 3.15: Difference between Pyramidal and Extra-pyramidal tracts 

Pyramidal | Extrapyramidal 
Origin - Cortical only - Cortical wide origin and subcortical 
Tract - Only one neuron from the | - Multineuronal i.e. multiple synapses 

cortex to AHCs. along its course are present. 
Crossingf ibers | - more than 90 %. - About 50 %. 
Termination - AHCs (alpha & gamma) - Alpha & gamma neurones in the spinal 

and Cranial nerve nuclei cord (not at cranial nuclei). 
and 

Functions start | - after one year from birth. | - During the first year. 
Functions -Perform fine skilled -Control of gross & associated 

movements movements 
-Facilitates the muscle tone | -May inhibit or facilitate muscle tone. 

Lesions Both lost together= upper motor neuron lesion 

The medial brain stem pathways: 
v" They work with the ventral corticospinal tract. 
v" They are the pontine and medullary reticulaspinal, vestibulospinal, and tectospinal tracts 

(TST). 
v" These pathways terminate predominantly on interneurons in the ventral horn of spinal 

cord to control axial and proximal muscles. 

B Lateral brain stem pathways A Medial brain stem pathways 

Red nucleus 
{magnocellular part) 

Medial 
reticular 
formation 

Tectospinal 

Lateral and medial 
tract 

vestibular nucle: 

Reticulospinal 
tract 

Vestibulospina! 
tracts 

Rubrospinal 
tract 

Fig. 3.36: Medial and lateral brain stem pathways 

159 



CHAPTER ll: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

The lateral brain stem pathway: it include both lateral corticospinal tract( mentioned 
before) and rubrospinal tract. 
Rubrospinal tract function: 

v’ It is the fibers that arise from the red nucleus of the midbrain. 
v Red nucleus have somatographic representation of all the muscles of the body but is 

much less fine than representation of area 4. 
v' They terminate on interneurons in the ventral horn of spinal cord that control distal limb 

muscles. 
v’ This rubrospinal tract excites flexor motor neurons and inhibits extensor motor neurons. 

v' In humans, although it is not very prominent, it is a weak alternative for fine movements 
performance after pyramidal tract injury. 

Table 3.16: Comparison between medial and lateral motor system 

Medial Motor System Lateral Motor System 

Site of Medial or ventral portion of anterior | Lateral portion of anterior 
termination horn horn 

Muscles Trunk muscles 
: Distal limb muscles 
innervated Proximal limb muscles 

Controls gross movements 
Controls body posture Controls fine, skilled 

Function Provides stable background during (discrete) voluntary 
performance of fine movements by movements 
distal limb muscles 

Ventral corticospinal tract 
Reticulospinal tracts Lateral corticospinal tract 

Tracts Involved 
Vestibulospinal tracts Rubrospinal tract 
Tectospinal tract 

160 



CHAPTER ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

BLOOD SUPPLY OF SPINAL CORD 

ARTERAL SUPPLY 
The spinal cord is supplied by three sets of arteries: two longitudinal (anterior & posterior 
spinal arteries) and many segmental radicular arteries. 
2. Anterior Spinal Artery (Figs. 3.37 & 3.38) 

Origin: a single artery formed by union of two 
anterior spinal arteries, each is a branch of 
the vertebral artery inside the skull. 
Course: It descends through the foramen 
magnum then runs in the anterior median 
fissure of the spinal cord. 
Distribution: It supplies the medial part of 
medulla oblongata and the anterior 2/3 of 
the cross-sectional area of the spinal cord i.e. Posterior 

anterior & lateral white columns & ventral spinal 
horn, lateral horn & base of dorsal horn. Anterior spinal 

3. Posterior Spinal Arteries (Figs. 3.37 & 3.38) Fig. 3.37: Spinal arteries 
Origin: Each posterior spinal artery arises 

Posteriorspinal 
from the vertebral artery or more - Posterior 
commonly from its posterior inferior | RN radicular 

cerebellar branch. 
Course: It descends through the foramen 
magnum then along the postero-lateral 
sulcus dividing into two branches, one 
descends anterior & the other posterior S Anterior 

to the dorsal roots of the spinal nerves. Anterior spinal radicular 

Distribution: it supplies the posterior 1/3 Fig. 3.38: Blood supply of spinal cord 
of the spinal cord i.e. posterior white 
column & posterior horn. 

4. Segmental (Radicular) Arteries (Fig. 3.38 
Origin: arise as twigs from the vertebral, ascending cervical, posterior intercostal 
&1% lumbar artery. 
Course: They enter the vertebral canal through the intervertebral foramina. They give 
anterior & posterior radicular branches that pass along the ventral & dorsal roots to 
reach the surface of the spinal cord & form an arterial circle of anastomosis with the 
branches of anterior & posterior spinal arteries “arterial vasacorona”. Branches from 
this circle supply the periphery of the spinal cord. 
Some radicular arteries may be large & are called feeder arteries. One of the feeder 
arteries is called artery of Adamkiewicz which arises from 11" intercostal artery & 
may be the main supply to the lower two-thirds of the cord. 

t 

e Once an artery enters the substance of the spinal cord, it is an end artery. 
e The cervical part of the spinal cord depends more on anterior & posterior spinal arteries, 

while lower segments depend more on the radicular arteries. 

161 



CHAPTER Iii: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

e The mid-thoracic segments of the cord are the most liable to become ischemic. The richest 

blood supply is to the lumbar region. 

VENOUS DRAINAGE (Fig. 3.39) 

Six longitudinal veins ascend on surface of spinal cord: 
Postermedian 

1. Anteromedian vein along the anterior median fissure. 

2. Posteromedian vein along the posterior median sulcus. 
3. Four veins that run on either side of the ventral & 

dorsal roots. 

These veins communicate freely with each other. They 
drain into the internal vertebral venous plexus and 

communicate with the intervertebral veins. Near the base Anteromedian 
of the skull, the longitudinal veins communicate with the Fig. 3.39 Veins of spinal cord 
cerebellar veins & cranial venous sinuses. 

162 



CHAPTER Il: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

SPINAL CORD LESIONS 

I- Complete transverse section (transection) of the cord: 
e Above C5 > death (due to paralysis of diaphragm & intercostal muscles) 
e Between C5-T1 -> Quadriplegia 
e BelowTl => Paraplegia 

li- Hemisection of the cord: (Fig. 3.40) 
This leads to Brown Sequard syndrome 
1. At the same level of the lesion: 

- Ipsilateral loss of all types of sensations 
(destruction of posterior (dorsal) root. 

- Ipsilateral LMNL (damage of ant. horn cells). 
2. Below the level of the lesion ipsilateral: 

- Loss of proprioceptive sensations (affection 
of the posterior column). 

- UMNL (affection of the lateral corticospinal proprioception 
tract) temp. UMNL 

3. Below the level of the lesion contralateral: 
- Loss of pain & temperature sensations 

(affection of lateral spinothalamic tract). 
Fig. 3.40: Hemisection of sp. cord 

lI-Anterior Spinal artery occlusion: (Fig. 3.41) leads to: 
- Bilateral UMNL paralysis below the lesion. 
- Bilateral loss of pain & temperature sensations below 

the lesion with preservation of proprioception & touch 

Fig. 3.41: Ant. spinal A. occlusion 

163 

— 



CHAPTER Iii: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Sensory and Motor systems Lesions1 
e Various types of sensory abnormalities can occur when interruption or damage occur 

at any level along the sensory pathways. These sensory abnormalities may result in 
sensory loss, altered sensations or pain. 

e |n addition, motor pathways could also be affected resulting in motor weakness. 

Motor neurone lesions 

| ETS Jose bY 
—r oo. 

Fig. 3.42: Upper and Lower Motor neuron lesion 

1) Lower Motor neuron lesion: 
- Cause: injury of spinal motor neuron or cranial nerve nuclei to effector organ e.g. 

Poliomyelitis 
- Effects: 

1) Effect on voluntary movement: localized ipsilateral flaccid paralysis of a muscle or a 
group of muscles supplied by the affected nerves. 

2) Effect on reflex activity: 
- All reflexes of the affected muscles are decreased or lost due to interruption 

of the reflex arc pathway. 
v' Loss of muscle tone: hypotonia or atonia (flaccidity). 
v' Loss of deep reflexes and tendon jerks: hyporeflexia or areflexia. 
v’ Loss of superficial reflexes of the affected muscles. 

3) Effect on muscle state: 
Marked atrophy (degeneration, wasting) of the affected muscle occur due to: 
- Loss of voluntary and reflex activity of the muscle. 
- Loss of trophic effects on metabolism of the affected muscle due to damage of 

their nerve supply. 
4) The paralyzed muscle may show fasciculation or fibrillations: 

v’ Fasciculations 
Definition: Jerky, visible contractions of groups of muscle fibers. Can be felt and 
seen 
Cause: pathologic discharge of spinal motor neurons. 

v' Fibrillations: 
Definition: Fine, irregular contractions of individual fibers, detectable electro- 
physiologically, but invisible to the eye. Felt only. 
Cause: denervation hypersensitivity of the denervated muscles to the circulating 
acetylcholine 

164 

eee — 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

2) Upper Motor neuron lesion (Fig. 3.43) 
- Cause: injury of descending motor neuron from cortex to spinal motor neurons or from 

cortex to cranial nerve nuclei, commonly due to vascular accidents or space occupying 
lesion {tumor). 

Motar cortex = | Upper motor neuron 

Lower motor neuron 
Brainstem | 

{cramal nerve) 

Corticospinal tract 

Lower motor neuron 
Spinal cord (spinal nerve) 

Fig 3.43: Uber motor neuron lesion 
- Effects: 

1. Effect on voluntary movement: 
e Generalized contralateral paralysis of half of the body (contralateral hemiplegia). 
« If the upper motor neuron is damaged below the level of the medulla, the effects 
of the lesion would be ipsilateral. 

e After a period of 2- weeks, there is improvement (not regeneration) in gross 
movements of axial and proximal limb muscles. However, fine movements of 
distal muscles are permanently lost. 

Fig 3.44: Circumduction Gate 
e Causes of improvements in gross movements: 

- Intact ipsilateral corticospinal innervation to the paralyzed half of the body. 
These little number of fibers terminate on medial a cells in the anterior horn 
of the spinal cord that mediate gross movements. 

- The patient then can walk by a type of gait called circumduction. 
2. Effect on reflex activity: 

- Exaggerated reflex in the opposite side of the lesion. 
- Muscle tone: hypertonia (spasticity). 

165 

! 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

* Due to loss of the supraspinal inhibitory effect on y motor neuron, with the 

result of increased y motor neuron activity. 

* Hypertonia is marked in the antigravity muscles; so, the upper limb flexed and 

adducted, the lower limb extended and adducted. 

* Spasticity is of clasp knife character (Fig. 3.45). If sufficient force applied, initial 

stretch produces high limb resistance, followed by a sudden inhibition of 

resistance due to activation of the oversensitive Golgi tendon in stretched 

muscle. (as pocketknife snapping shut). 
- Deep reflexes and tendon jerks: hyperreflexia. 

* Clonus is present in the hyper reflexive muscles. It is repeated cycles of stretch- 

inverse stretch reflex, occurs when a hypertonic muscle is subjected to sudden 

maintained stretch. It is examined in the knee (patellar clonus) and the ankle 

(ankle clonus Fig. 3.46). 

« Oversensitive Golgi tendon 
organs (loss of inhibitory 
commands from UMN) 

Fig. 3.45: Clasp knife spasticity 
- Loss of superficial abdominal reflexes because they were controlled by the 

damaged UMN. 
- Plantar reflex: Positive Babinski sign 

3. Effect on muscle state: 
- Minimal atrophy (disuse atrophy) of the affected muscle may occur due to: 

* Loss of voluntary activity of the muscle only while its reflex activity is 

exaggerated. 
* No loss of trophic effects on metabolism of the affected muscle because their 

nerve supply (LMN) is intact. 
Cand '-F 2a 3 7F WR << TF 3 = 

Fig. 3.46: Knee and Ankle clonus 

166 



CHAPTER Ili: TH E MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Table 3.17: Differences between chronic UMNL and LMNL 

Chronic UMNL LMNL 

1. Definition: - Widespread - Localized 

Affected side Contralateral - Ipsilateral 

Spread of paralysis | Paralysis of movement - Paralysis of separate Ms. 

Site of lesion - due to lesion in descending tracts | - lesion in motor neuron. 

2. Character Spastic paralysis Flaccid Paralysis 

3. Recovery Never (no neurilemma) May recover 

Immediate atrophy 
4, Muscle state Disuse Atrophy on long term 

Muscle —> fibrous tissue 

5. Muscle Tone Increased Decreased (alpha damage) 

6. Muscle power [Lost lost 

7. Sup. Reflexes All Lost except +ve Babinski All are lost 

8. Deep Reflexes  |Hyperreflexia Hyporeflexia 

8, Regction of Absent Present 
Denervation 

10. Clonus Present Absent 

N.B,: Acute UMNL is exactly the same as LMNL except in: Widespread, +ve Babinski, No 
Atrophy. 
Table 3.18: Difference between corticobulbar tract lesion and fascial palsy 

Corticobulbar tract Fascial palsy (Fig. 3.48, 3.49) 
Site of lesion UMNL Fascial nucleus or fascial nerve 

Characters 1) Upper face is spared 1) Upper face is affected 
2) Lower face affected 2) Lower face is affected 
3) Contralateral effects 3} Ipsilateral effects 

167 



CHAPTER il: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Fig. 3.47: LMNL of fascial nerve 

A 
ee) ¥ a f Fd 

1 Fr, 
nr 

GRAN - CTT 
Fig. 3.48: LMNL of fascial nerve (fascial palsy) 

DISORDERS OF MUSCLE TONE 
v Muscle tone is It is a state of sub-tetanic continuous contraction of skeletal muscle affects 

mainly antigravity muscles, caused by static component of stretch reflex. 

v The antigravity muscles (flexors of upper limbs, extensors of lower limbs, extensors of back 

of neck, extensors of back of trunk and elevators of the lower jaw), 
v' Clinically, tone can be defined as the resistance that is encountered when the joint of a 

relaxed patient is moved passively. 
v' Clinically muscle tone may be abnormally increased (Hypertonia) or decreased (Hypotonia) 

Causes of hypotonia (Flaccidity): 

Loss of excitatory supraspinal control of static muscle stretch reflex: 

1) Cerebellar lesions (neocerebellar disease). 
2) Chorea. 
3) Lower motor neuron lesion (e.g. Tabes dorsalis, polyneuritis, myasthenia graves). 
4) Acute stage of upper motor neuron lesion. 
5) Lesion of area 4. 
6) Increased serum Ca*™ level. 

Causes of hypertonia 
e There are two major types of hypertonia 

1) Spasticity. 
2) Rigidity. 

168 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Table 3.19: Comparison between types of hypertonia 

Spasticity Rigidity 

Definition Initial resistance followed by | Maintained resistance all through 
sudden release the movement 

Cause Upper motor neuron lesion | Lesion in substantia nigra 
(chronic stage) 

Spinal motor neurons Increased activity of y motor Increased activity of both of a and 
neurons y motor neurons, but mainly a 

Affected muscles Mainly the antigravity All body and head muscles are 
muscles are affected. affected except extraocular 

muscles, flexor muscles are 
mainly affected. 

Resistance to Unidirectional Bidirectional 
movement 

Character of rigidity | Clasp knife (sudden release | Lead pipe (continuous resistance) 
after initial resistance) or Cog- 

| Wheel (interrupted resistance). 
Deep reflexes Exaggerated, hyperreflexia Normo-reflexia 

169 



CHAPTER Iii: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Sensory and Motor systems Lesions 2 
Types (levels) of sensory lesions: 

1- Peripheral nerve lesions. 
2- Spinal cord lesions. 
3- Brain stem lesions. 
4- Thalamic lesions. 
5- Lesions of sensory cortex. 

1- Peripheral nerve lesions: 
a) Mononeuropathy (Fig. 3.49): 

Definition: Lesion of a peripheral nerve. 
Effects: Loss of all sensations in the area supplied by the 
affected nerve and motor affection in muscles 
innervated by that nerve. 

Fig. 3.49: Mononeuropathy 
b) Polyneurapathy (peripheral neuritis Fig. 3.50): 

Definition: Lesion of multiple peripheral nerves that 
supply the distal parts of upper and lower limbs. 

_Fig. 3.50:Peripheral 
neuropathy 
Cause: 

1- Genetic. 
2- Acquired, due to: 

o Metabolic disorders as Diabetes mellites. 
o Physical injury (trauma) to nerves 
eo Tumors 
oe Toxins 
e¢ Autoimmune responses 
e Nutritional deficiencies e.g. vitamin Bai 

deficiency. 
e Alcoholism 
e Vascular 

Effects: in the peripheral parts of the body (hands and 
feet) 
1- Sensory effects: 

- Numbness. Tingling Pricking sensations 
(paresthesia). 

170 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

- Then, hypoesthesia (diminished all sensations). 
- Then, anesthesia (loss of all sensations). 
- Gloves and Stockings sensory loss 

2- Motor effects: lower motor neuron lesion (LMNL): 
- Muscle weakness (paresis). 
- Then, paralysis of muscles. 
- Loss of reflexes of muscles. 
- Muscle wasting (atrophy). 

2- Spinal cord lesions: Fig. 3.51: Cavitation around 
A) Syringomyelia (central cord lesion) the central canal of spinal cord 

Definition: cyst or glial tissue or fluid 
accumulation that increases over time and leads 
to cavitation around the central canal of the 
spinal cord, commonly of cervical segments. On 
progression of the disease, cavitation extends to 
thoracic segments and medulla oblongata (Fig. 
3.51). 
Cause: Unknown, may be genetic. More common in middle aged females. 
Effects: 
a) In small-limited lesions 

- Sensory effects: damage to spinothalamic fibers 
crossing in front of the central canal, causing bilateral regions of 
sensory loss of pain and temperature in the upper limbs and upper parts of chest and 
back (jacket distribution of sensory loss (Fig. 3.52). 

- Crude touch (partially carried in dorsal column pathway), and other dorsal column 
sensations are not lost (dissociated sensory loss). 

Loof spin sana 
TTI EEL 

Sarees 

Fig. 3.52: Jacketd istribution of sensory loss 

b- In progressive lesion: 
- Sensory effects: same as before 
- Motor effects: combined: 

v' lower motor neuron lesion due to damage of the anterior horn cells (flaccid 
paralysis with loss of reflexes) of skeletal muscles innervated by the affected 
segments. 

v' Upper motor neuron lesion due to damage to corticospinal tract fibers. 

171 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Autonomic effects: damage of lateral horn cells, leading to autonomic 
dysfunction, commonly Horner's syndrome. 

c- In more progressive lesion: 
Sensory effects: same as before 
Motor effects: same as before, in addition to damage of medullary cranial nerve 
nuclei = Syringobulbia. 
Autonomic effects: same as before 
Brain stem effects: damage of one or more cranial nerves, resulting in various 
kinds of facial palsies, sensory and motor impairments. 

B) Tabes Dorsalis (Posterior cord lesion, Fig. 3.53) 
Definition and Cause: 
v' a complication of neurosyphilis, with atrophy of dorsal root of the spinal cord 

central to DRG. 
v' Commonly affects lumbosacral segments of the spinal cord. 
v' More common in males 

Tabes 
Dorsalis 

T8 spinal A 
segment 

f 

Fig. 3.53: Tabes dorsalis with affection of posterior column of T8 segment of spinal cord 

Effects: 
a- In early stages, the lesion causes inflammation in the affected area, this leads to: 

- Sensory effects: severe attacks of pain in the lower limbs due to irritation of 
dorsal root. 

b- In late stages, the lesion causes formation of a tumor like tissue called syphilitic 
gumma that produces compression on the nerves passing through this area. This 
nerve compression leads to: 

Sensory loss: 

v" loss of all sensations in the affected dermatomes. 
v’ The first sensation to be lost is vibration. 
v’ The last sensation to be lost is slow pain because the compression is from 

outside to inside. The pain fibers are located centrally. 
- Sensory ataxia: 

v The lost proprioception in the lower limbs results in incoordination of 
voluntary movements in absence of paralysis. 

172 



CHAPTER lil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

v" The patient has to open his eyes to be coordinated, otherwise he falls down 
upon eyes closure. 

N.B.: Normal coordination of movements depends on perception of vestibular, 
visual and proprioceptor information by an intact cerebellum. 
- Stamping (steppage) gait: 
v lifting legs very high to hit the ground hard, with opened eyes looking at the 

leg. 

- Motor effects: 
v" Damage of afferents of spinal reflexes (deafferentation), leading to decreased 

reflexes (hypotonia, hyporeflexia) or may be complete loss of reflexes in the 
skeletal muscle related to the affected segments. 

c- In more progressive stages, the lesion affects the brain stem, and causes damage 
of the pretectal area of the midbrain {center of pupillary light reflex). This leads to 
loss of the eye pupil reaction to light, however the pupil itself is normal and can 
respond to other reflexes such as near response reflex. This type of pupil is called 
Argyll-Robertson pupil. 

closed patient ' 
tend to fall 

Steppage gait 

together 

Fig. 3.54: signs of tabes dorsalis 
a: sensory ataxia. b: stepping gate 

C) Hemi-section of the spinal cord (Brown-Sequard Syndrome) 

173 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Cause; Traumatic injury, accidents (Fig. 3.55). 

Upper motor 
neurons 

| Hemisection of 
Sensory neurons spinal cord 

E S — 
—; 

Lower. motor ¥ 
neurons Fr 

ipsilateral loss of Contralateral loss of 
tactile sensation and pain and temperature 
proprioception sensation 

Fig. 3.55: Hemi-section of spinal cord 

Effects: 
a- At the level of the lesion: 

- Lower motor neuron lesion of the skeletal muscle supplied by the efferent nerves 

that arise from the damaged segments (flaccid paralysis with loss of reflexes). 

- Loss of all sensations in the affected dermatome innervated by afferent nerves 

that enter the damaged segments. 
b- Below the level of the lesion: 

- Ipsilateral upper motor neuron lesion of the skeletal muscle (spastic paralysis with 

exaggerated reflexes). 
- Ipsilateral loss of dorsal column sensations. 
- Contralateral loss of spinothalamic sensations. 

D) Complete transection of the spinal cord (Fig. 3.56): 
Cause: Gunshot injuries, Dislocation of spine, vascular accident 
Effects: 
- Sensory Effects: 
v complete and permanent loss of all sensations below the level of the lesion. The 

damaged sensory tracts have no neurilemma and can never regenerate, so 

sensations are permanently lost. 
- Voluntary motor effects: 

v' complete and permanent loss of all voluntary movements below the level of 

the lesion. The damaged motor tracts have no neurilemma and can never 

regenerate, so voluntary motor functions are permanently lost, and the patient 

becomes paralyzed. 
v' The extent of paralysis depends on the anatomical site of the lesion: 

i. Transection in cervical region above C5: 

174 

WA Te. all =i 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

is fatal and leads to death, due to interruption of the impulses between the 
respiratory center and C 3,4 & 5 (Origin of phrenic nerve supplying the 
diaphragm), and consequently respiratory failure. 

Acute Spinal Cord Injury 

Quadnplegia 
(floss of movaman 
and sensation 
in all four limbs) rd 

Paraplegia 
(loss of movaemant 
and sensation 

in the tower half 
of the body) 

Fig. 3.56: Spinal cord injury below level of C5 
Quadriplegia) and midthoracic level (Paraplegia) 

ii-Transection in cervical region below C5 leads to paralysis of all body muscles in upper and 
lower limbs (Quadriplegia). Respiration is diaphragmatic only, with paralysis of the intercostal 
muscles. 
iii-Transection in mid-thoracic region leads to intact voluntary movements of upper limb, while 
the paralysis involves all lower limb muscles (Paraplegia). Respiration is intact both by 
diaphragmatic and intercostal muscles activity. 

-Reflex motor effects: 
v' Reflexes below the level of the lesion pass in a stage of spinal shock. This stage is 

followed by either a stage of recovery or a stage of failure of reflexes. 
%* Stage of spinal shock: 

-Definition: Complete loss of all reflexes below the level of the lesion. 
-Cause: Sudden withdrawal of the facilitatory corticospinal, reticulospinal, vestibulospinal 
impulses. This result in decrease excitability of spinal motor neurons, and loss of their response 
to stimulation by afferents in reflex pathway. 
-Duration: in human: 2-6 weeks. The duration of spinal shock is proportionate to the degree 
of encephalization of motor function (control of spinal motor functions by the higher brain 
centers). 
-Manifestations: 

v' Loss of stretch reflex, atonia, areflexia and flaccid muscles. 
v' Loss of flexor withdrawal reflex and superficial reflexes. 
v" Loss of autonomic reflexes, resulting in atonia in walls and sphincters of bladder and 

rectum, with retention and overflow dibbling. 
v' loss of vasomotor control on sympathetic lateral horn cells, resulting in loss of 

vasomotor tone and hypotension. 

175 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

v' The blood flow to the paralyzed limb is decreased (due to decrease in blood pressure), 

and the venous return from the paralyzed limb is decreased (due to atonia). The 

paralyzed limbs become bluish in color (cyanosed), cold and dry, with decreased 
nutrition. 

v Bed ulcers (bedsores) may occur especially in the dependent areas (on which the 
patient is lying) of the paralyzed limbs. 

v" Muscle atrophy (wasting). 
v' Bone demineralization, release of bone minerals into blood and hypercalcemia that is 

very dangerous on the heart and kidneys due to degradation of matrix protein. 
rey FT ra-  _ —r~rTY a ren ed ls = Si la == Bea  WT a Bala Ss 

Te hb" J] LA P= LY Ft nt #1 fp it pr aS Se Na eae 
) - " wy a ® 1 

Fig. 3.57: most common sites for bed sores 

-Care for the patient during the stage of spinal shock: 
- Physiotherapy to prevent muscle atrophy. 
- Antibiotics to resist infections of bedsores (Fig. 3.57). 
- Frequent mobilization in bed to avoid bed sores. 
- Good nutrition. 
- Urinary catheter and rectal enema. 

* Stage of failure of reflexes: 
- Inappropriate care for the patient during the stage of spinal shock leads to severe 

infections of bedsores and urinary tract. The resulting toxemia depresses the 
functions of the entire CNS, including the vital centers, leading to death. 

* Stage of recovery of reflexes: 
Good care for the patient during the stage of spinal shock leads to recovery of reflex 

activity. 

- Causes of reflexes recovery: The recovery of reflex excitability may be due to: 

1) The development of denervation hypersensitivity by the remaining spinal 
neurons, and so they can now respond to afferent stimulation. 

2) Another possibility is the increase of collaterals from existing neurons, with 

the formation of more excitatory endings on interneuron's and motor 

heurons. ir 
- Manifestation: 

Return of muscle tone at first in flexor muscles (paraplegia in flexion). 
Return of flexor withdrawal reflex. 
Return of knee jerk, then ankle jerk. 
Return of ABP to normal during rest (due to return of muscle tone that 
increases the venous return), but regulation of blood pressure changes is 
inappropriate. 

176 

ENEN NAN  



CHAPTER lil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

v Return of reflex evacuation of bladder and rectum as in infants, without 
voluntary control (automatic bladder and rectum, filling to about 150 ml and 
then evacuation occurs). 
Sexual reflexes of erection and ejaculation can be induced by local genital 
tactile stimulation that sends impulses to stimulate autonomic LHCs in 
lumbar and sacral segments. However, the cortical sexual desire and act is 
never regained. 
Mass reflex: Mass reflex can be elicited in some cases by scratching of the 
skin over the lower limbs or the anterior abdominal wall. The response will 
be: spasm of flexor muscles of both limbs, evacuation of rectum and 
bladder, profuse sweating below the level of lesion, contraction of 
abdominal muscles, erection, elevation of ABP. 
This reflex is explained by the developed denervation hypersensitivity, 
release phenomenon from inhibitory gamma motor neurons and increased 
collaterals in the spinal cord. The response of these changes is that a large 
portion of the spinal cord is stimulated at the same time with a possibility 
of irradiation and reverberating circuits between these collateral neurons. 

- After some time: 
v Muscle tone increases in extensors (paraplegia in extension) 
v Flexor withdrawal reflex is associated with crossed extensor reflex. 
v Return of infantile reflexes which were suppressed by corticospinal tract e.g. 

grasp reflex and positive Babinski sign. 
v Hyperactivity of the returned reflexes may be present. 

3- Thalamic syndrome: 
It is due to hematoma or thrombosis of thalamo-geniculate artery. 
Manifestation: 
A) Immediate effects (acute stage): 

i. Crossed Hemi-anesthesia = loss of all sensations on the opposite side of the body 
and face. 

ii. Secondary hyperalgesia due to release or rebound from gate inhibitory fibers. 
iif. Sensory ataxia. 

B) Delayed effects: 
1) Recovery of crude sensations but become more poorly localized and with high 

threshold (more crude). 
2) Fine sensation never recover. 
3) Secondary hyperalgesia 
4) Paroxysmal attacks of pain due to release from gate inhibition 
5) Thalamic Hyperpathia = unpleasant sensation but not pain. 
6) Emotional disturbances 
7) Motor ataxia 

177 



CHAPTER Iii: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

BASAL GANGLIA 

Basal nuclei are masses of grey matter lying within each cerebral hemisphere near its base. 

They include: (Fig. 3.58) 
e Corpus striatum: 

- Caudate Nucleus 
-  Lentiform Nucleus (formed of putamen medially & globus pallidus laterally) 

e Amygdaloid Nuclei (part of limbic system). 
 Claustrum (grey matter that lies lateral to Lentiform N and separated from it by external 

capsule). It is separated from grey matter of insula by the extreme capsule. It is of unknown 

function. 
Corpus Striatum 

Striatum Pallidum 
| 

Caudate Nucleus Globus Pallidus 

Lentiform Nucleus 

Neostriatum Paleostriatum 

Fig. 3.58 a: Components of basal ganglia 

Caudate Nucleus (Fig. 3.60 b) 
® |s a C-shaped Nucleus 
® |t has a head, body and tail Tail of 

caudate 
= The head of caudate N. is 

continuous with putamen of Lentiform 

lentiform N. Amygdala 

= The head bulges into the ant. 
horn of the lateral ventricle. 
its body lies in the floor of the 
body of lateral ventricle. 
Its tail lies in the roof of the 
inferior horn of lateral ventricle. 

= The tip of the tail is continuous 
with the amygdaloid nuclei. Fig. 3.58b: Caudate nucleus 

178 



CHAPTER lil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Lentiform Nucleus 
= [t looks like a biconvex lens. 
= Jt is enclosed between the external 

capsule (laterally) and the internal 
capsule (medially). 

= [tis divided by external medullary lamina 
into: 
- Putamen (laterally) 
- Globus Pallidus (medially): appears | 

white due to rich myelin content. 

Note: Neostriatum (Caudate & Putamen) are 
similar in structure — it receives afferents and 
project to Paleostriatum (Globus Pallidus) 
which sends all efferents. Fig. 3.58 c: basal ganglia 

nctionally rel lei 
a- Substantia nigra: 

It is generally considered part of the basal ganglia due to its similar neuronal structure 
and related function of motor control but may also be considered part of midbrain due to 
its location. It contains most of the neurotransmitter dopamine in the brain which play a 
great role in motor coordination. The substantia nigra is divided into a pars compacta and 
a pars reticulata 

b- Subthalamic nucleus: 
It is located lateral to the red nucleus and dorsal to substantia nigra. 

Functions: concerned with muscular activity. They help the motor cortex in learning of motor 
skills (e.g., writing the alphabet) & also prepare the body posture to suit the movement. 

Blood Supply: Central branches of ant. & middle cerebral arteries. Veins drain into 
thalamostriate vein. 

17S 



CHAPTER lll: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Physiology of basal ganglia 
Caudate nucleus 

Thalamus 
Thalamus 

ia teral ventricle 

Caudate nucleus nucleus  Putamen and 
globus pallidus Putamen 

Lateral view > > 5 <7 Eo ‘ 1) a E HA=  CHOBUS SENUS 

oO 2 A — ToiPar  External segment 
Caudate nucleus Thalamus RD ri a Lfces a 2. Internal segment 

- Subthalamic 

El nay a ER: A nucleus 
"30s, nigra 

a Amygdala 
Globus 
pallidus Tail of Frontal section 

Putamen caudate nucleus 

Horizontal section 

Sourca: Barrett KE, Barman SM, Boitanc S, BruoksH: Gonong 5 Review of Medicol Phyziology. 

23©  Edition: Wttp:/ were. access medicina.com 

Fig. 3.59: Parts of basal ganglia 
Parts of basal ganglia: refer to anatomy lecture 
e The basal ganglia cannot function alone by itself but acts in close association with the 

cerebral cortex (like cerebellum). They do not give direct descending tracts to spinal cord 
motor neurons but control motor functions through their connection to brain stem nuclei 
(i.e. the basal ganglia is a chief part of extra pyramidal system). 

e The corpus striatum receives the afferent input fibers to the basal ganglia, while the globus 
pallidus represents the main efferent pathway from the basal ganglia. 

Connection of basal ganglia can be summarized as follows 

A- Cortical connection B- Connection between C- Brain stem 
nuclei of basal ganglia connection 

Function Function Function 
- Inhibits excessive - Controls intrinsic - Regulation of 

activity of motor activity of basal muscle tone 
cortical areas (4,6). ganglia. and body 

- Inform the basal posture. 
ganglia about 
program and 
intension of 
movements. 

180 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

1. Cortical connections 
2 main circuits, namely the caudate and putamen circuits. These circuits function as closed 
negative feedback circuits. 

Table 3.20: the caudate and putamen circuits 

Caudate circuit Putamen circuit 

Fibers begin mainly from the motor and | Fibers begin mainly from the premotor, 
sensory association areas to the caudate | supplementary motor area and 
nucleus then to globus pallidus and then to | somatosensory areas (less from 
thalamus, then back to prefrontal, premotor | primary motor area) to the putamen 
and supplementary motor areas. (does not | then to globus pallidus to thalamus 
return to primary motor area) then back to primary motor and 

premotor areas. 

Function: cognitive (thinking) control of | Function: is to control complex pattern 
sequences of motor pattern. (Cognitive | of skilled learned movements. 
control of motor activity determines 
subconsciously, and within seconds, which 
patterns of movement will be used together 
to achieve a complex goal that might itself 
last for many seconds). 

Premotor and Primary motor 
supplemental 

Ventroanterior and 
ventrolateral 

nuclei of =] 3 

Subthalamus i Globus pallidus 

intemal/external 

Substantia nigra 

Fig. 3.60: Caudate circuit 

181 



CHAPTER lil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Premotor and 
supplemental Primary motor 

di TT _ Somatosens: 

Ventroanterior and 
ventrolateral 

nuclei of thalamus = “9 

5 - Putamen 

Subthalamus 
Globus 

Su pallidus 
bstantia nigra | internal/external 

Fig. 3.61: Putamen Circuit 
2. Connection between nuclei of basal ganglia 

1- Putamen, globus pallidus, subthalamus, thalamus, motor cortex. 
2- Putamen, globus pallidus, substantia nigra, thalamus, motor cortex. 

3. Brain stem connections 
Fibers from globus pallidus project to: 
1- Reticular formation 2- Red nucleus 3- Vestibular nucleus 

Neurotransmitters in basal ganglia: 
1- Fibers from cerebral cortex to corpus striatum release glutamate. 
2- Intrastriatal interneurons (caudate-putamen circuit) release acetyl choline. 
3- Fibers from Substantia nigra to corpus striatum release dopamine. 
4- Fibers from corpus striatum to substantia nigra release GABA. 

5- Fibers from basal ganglia to brain stem release noradrenalin, encephalin and serotonin. 

Caudaten ucleus 

Fig. 3.62: Neurotransmitters in basal ganglia 

Function of the complex neural circuits that link the basal nuclei with each other, with the 

thalamus, and with the cerebral cortex: 
e These feedback loops, some of which are stimulatory and others inhibitory. 

182 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

e The stimulatory circuits facilitate muscle activity, especially at the beginning of a 
voluntary movement like rising from a sitting position or beginning to walk. 

eo The inhibitory circuits facilitate the actions of the stimulatory circuits by inhibiting 
unwanted muscle activity. 

e The proper function of the basal ganglia depends on the balance between the 
excitatory neurotransmitter mainly Ach and the inhibitory neurotransmitter dopamine 
inside the cortico ~striatal —cortical feedback circuits 

Direct Pathway (Fig. 3.63) 
o The cortical inputs to the striatum is excitatory (glutamate) 
o Striatal outflow connects directly with the internal globus pallidus (GPi) (GABA, 

inhibitory). 
o It disinhibits the thalamus facilitating the thalamocortical pathway (it removes the 

inhibitory effect of GPi on the thalamus). 
o Thalamic projections excite the motor cortices 
o ltis an excitatory cortical-cortical circuit that likely functions to maintain ongoing motor 

activity. 
Indirect Pathway (Fig. 3.63) 
o The cortical input to the striatum is excitatory (glutamate). 

Outflow first traverses the GPe and subthalamic nucleus (STN) then connects to the GPi 
The net effect is the disinhibition of the STN 
Thus STN excites the GPi pathway which inhibits the thalamocortical pathway 
Therefore, the net effect is cortical inhibition. 
Therefore, the net effect of indirect pathway is cortical inhibition and suppression of 
muscle activity 

CERESRAL iia 
| CORTEX - 

—— FIle ! 
fon. =i.) 

STRIATUM + (on) 
| ea, (D2) 
; > Y- 

SUBSTANTIA Jb EXTERNAL 
NIGRA CC pal IDUM 
PARS COMPACTA ; 

CS aEa, 
— = 

SEUBrTHA LAMIC 
TER 
PALL IOUM ee 

yr: THALAMUS — 
La=F =F FN 

Fig. 3.63: Direct and Indirect pathway of putamen circuit 

Effects of dopamine and acetylcholine on these pathways: 
1- Dopamine in the nigrostriatal fibers has the following effects: 

DA=Excites the direct pathway through its action on D1 receptors. 
DA=Inhibits the indirect pathway through its action on D; receptors 
So, DA is facilitatory to the movement either by stimulation of the facilitatory direct 
pathway (via D1-R) or by inhibition to the inhibitory indirect pathway (via D2-R) 

2- Acetylcholine in the striatum has the following effects: 
It is present in balance with dopamine to facilitate the movement. 

183 

O OO O O O 



CHAPTER Iii: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

What happen if degeneration in the dopamine releasing neurons occurs? 
The activity in the direct pathway decreases and accordingly there is a decrease in the cerebral 

cortex activity. This appears clearly in the hypokinesia and slow voluntary movements with a 

disease called parkinsonism. Additionally, when the activity of the indirect pathway increases 
(which is inhibitory to cortex) = helping in hypokinesia. 
Functions of basal ganglia 

1- Regulation of muscle tone 
The effect of caudate is stimulatory on muscle tone mean while the lentiform nucleus 

decreases the muscle tone. But in general, the basal ganglion has an inhibitory effect on 
the muscle tone. 
Mechanism of inhibitory action of muscle tone 
a- It mainly decreases the activity of a motor neurons through decreasing the activity of 

the motor cortex. 
b- It decreases the activity of the y motor neurons through stimulation of the inhibitory 

reticular formation. 
2- Role in voluntary movements 

v' Although there are no descending pathways that connect basal ganglia directly to the 
spinal cord, the feedback circuits between it and all areas of cerebral cortex are involved 
in planning and programming of the voluntary movements. 

v’ The basal ganglia may act in conjunction with the supplementary motor cortex, to 
generate highly learned movement modules. 

v' They also seem to play a major role in controlling the proximal (axial) musculature, via 
the "extra-pyramidal" (mainly ventro-medial) pathways. 

The basal ganglia perform the following functions: 
A. Storage of the programs of some learned voluntary movements. The programs of 

some familiar movements which are done automatically and repeated are stored in the 
basal ganglia (putamen circuit) e.g. running when you see a rapid car approaching you, 

writing, eating, driving cars, signature & lighting candle. Lesion to this circuit leads to 

motor apraxia (i.e. as in lesion of area 6) loss of the ability to do familiar movements in 
absence of paralysis. 

B. Planning of motor activity 
The ideas and thoughts to do certain voluntary movements are translated into motor 
activity and controlled in the basal ganglia (caudate circuit) (cognitive control of motor 
activity of muscle). This includes the steps to do a voluntary movement, what muscles 
to be used, the duration, amplitude, speed and the scale of movements. 

C. Provision of postural background for the fine voluntary movements. 

Through adjusting the muscle tone of the proximal parts of the body (mainly via the 

ventro-medial pathways), the basal ganglia provide automatically the necessary 
postural tone to facilitate the more regulated skilled actions of the distal musculature 
i.e. it is a bridge between proximal and distal motor system (through ventro-medial 

pathways ). 
3- Automatic associated movements 

It is concerned (with area 6) with initiation of automatic associated movements carried out 

subconsciously (ex: swinging of arms during walking, fascial expression, gesture 
movements reflecting emotional state). 

184 



CHAPTER lil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

4- in lower animals, BG is highest motor center: so, it functions as primary motor cortex (i.e. 
like area '4'). 

v" The basal ganglia then, appear to be able either to promote and facilitate motor 
activity or to inhibit it - and probably does both: suppressing unwanted actions which 
might interfere with a desired movement, whilst amplifying and facilitating those 
processes which contribute in the genesis of the desired movement. 

v’ This could give some insight into the physiological basis for the observation that 
disorders of the basal ganglia may give rise either to excessive, uncontrolled, 
involuntary movements, or to hypokinesia and difficulty in initiating voluntary actions, 
or to combinations of both. 

Basal ganglia lesions 

The clinical picture depends on the nuclei affected. 

Chorea = dancing 
Causes: 

e Lesion in the caudate nucleus (degeneration of GABA releasing neurons from striatum 
to globus pallidus externa), leading to decrease activity of indirect pathway as shown 
in (Fig. 3.67) due to 

1- As a complication for rheumatic fever (Sydenham’s chorea), self-limited (no 
dementia). 

2- Congenital (Huntington’s chorea) = (progressive dementia). 
3- Prolonged use of L dopa ( Tardive parkinsonism). 

e Dementia means decreased memory and cognitive function. 
Clinical picture: 

1- Hypotonia and pendular knee jerk. 
2- Involuntary movements: sudden semi-purposeful movements 

v' dancing movements of arms, legs, face, head and trunk 
v" increase by emotions and decrease by sleep. 

Athetosis = no fixed position (Mobile spasm) 
Causes: 

e¢ Lesion in lentiform nuclei mainly globus pallidus (degeneration of GABA releasing 
neurons which project to the thalamus). 

Clinical picture 
1- Hypertonia. 
2- Involuntary movements = slow twisting movements. 

v' involving distal parts: hands and fingers and face and neck. 
v' snake-like movement= pronation with flexion followed by supination with 

extension. 
v" increase by emotions, decrease by sleep). 

Hemiballismus 
Cause: 

e Lesion in subthalamic nuclei. When glutamate decreases in subthalamic nucleus, it 
couldn't carry out its normal role in exciting the globus pallidus, the globus pallidus 
becomes inhibited). 

185 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Clinical picture: 
1- Hypertonia. 
2- Involuntary movements: Attacks of rapid violent movements 

v" involving half of the body that may cause loss of balance. 
v' Also, it may be fatal due to spasm of the respiratory muscles 

PARKINSONISM HLMIBALLISMLS CHOREA 

IY Brain Stem, ; Brain Stem, da Brain Stem, 
Spinal Cord Spinal Cord Spinal Cord Spinal Cord 

Fig. 3.64: Disorders of basal ganglia pathways. 

Parkinsonism = Paralysis agitans (old misnomer) 

Definition: 
It is a degenerative disease affecting substantia nigra, leading to damage of nigrostriatal 

fibers with loss of dopamine secretion in the caudate and putamen nuclei, resulting in 

imbalance between acetylcholine and dopamine with actual decrease of dopamine and 

relative increase of acetyl choline. 
Causes of Parkinsonism (most common in the elderly, > 65 yrs.) 
1. Idiopathic (Parkinson's disease): 80-85% 

Due to unknown neurotoxin or oxidation reactions with free radical generation = 

neuronal degeneration (environmental & genetic factors may be responsible). 

2. Viral encephalitis, vascular (post-stroke), trauma, Poison (CO or manganese) 

3. Drug-induced Parkinsonism: 
- Antipsychotics, antiemetics (metoclopramide) -* block D2 receptors. 

- Reserpine, Tetrabenazine -> depletes DA stores. 
- Methyldopa =» inhibits DA synthesis. 

Clinical picture: 
1- Rigidity (pseudo-paralysis): 

v' It is increase muscle tone that lead to stiffness of muscle during movements. 

186 



CHAPTER IIL: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

v" It occurs in both flexors and extensors (but more in flexor muscles causing flexor 
attitude of the patient). 

v' It is mainly alpha rigidity. 
v" It may be in form of; 

a) Cog wheel rigidity i.e. muscular resistance occurs in series during limb flexion. 
b) Lead pipe rigidity i.e. muscular resistance occurs all through limb flexion. This 

occurs due to rigidity of agonist and antagonist muscles. 
v' Mechanism of rigidity 

As the net effect of basal ganglia on muscle tone is inhibitory so it is expected to 
see hypertonia with its lesion due to increased excitability of motor neurons. 
In addition inhibitory effect of basal ganglia to cerebral cortex is lost so 
corticospinal activity is increased and called alpha rigidity 

2- Tremors = (Static tremors) 
v’ {tis characterized by: 

- Involuntary, regular, rapid movements in the form of pill rolling, coin counting, 
alternating pronation and supination in the hands. It may involve lower jaw 
and neck. 

- Disappear during sleep (because it is caused by increased cortical activity). 
- Exaggerated by emotions and fatigue. 
- Diminished by voluntary movements. 

v" Mechanism 
v' It may be due to the associated oscillatory discharge (on and off) in the globus 

pallidus interna and thalamic nucleus (ventralis intermedius) resulting in alternate 
activation and inactivation of the cortical motor areas. These oscillation involve 
multiple neurotransmitters as Ach, NE, GABA and to lesser extent DA and 5-HT 

3- Akinesia= poverty of movements 
Hypokinesia = reduction in speed of voluntary movement. 
v' Manifestation: rigidity affect all muscle of head and body except extraocular 

muscles. 
. Difficulty in initiation of voluntary movement 
Mask face (no blinking.) and staring appearance 

. Monotonous slurred slow speech. 

. Difficulty in buttoning cloths 
Necktie before shirt 
Lack of subconscious movements e.g. swinging of arms. 

7. Shuffling gait {short noisy gait) with trunk bending forward. 
v' Mechanism 

1- The increased inhibition of thalamo-cortical neurons is associated with 
decreased activity in supplementary motor area due to loss of planning and 
programming functions of BG. 

2- The increased muscle tone and rigidity interferes with initiation of movements. 
All lead to avoidance to do any movements so patient looks like statue, even 
simple act like walking, rising up from chair needs mental effort and 
concentration. 

N.B.: Rigidity is accompanied by norm-reflexia and not hyperreflexia as both agonist 
and antagonists are affected. 

187 

OnE WN 



CHAPTER ll: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

4- Postural disturbances and tendency to frequent fall. 
5- Non-motor manifestations: Cognitive impairment as Depression 

Neurodegenerative Diseases of basal ganglia 

DEFINITION: Degenerative diseases of the CNS are disorders characterized by the cellular 

degeneration of subsets of neurons that typically are related by function, rather than by 

physical location in the brain. Many of these disorders are associated with the accumulation 
of abnormal proteins. 

e They can be classified in a number of different ways including via the clinical presentation, 

type of protein that accumulates, pathological processes and underlying genetic 

abnormalities. 
e Neurodegenerative diseases that affect the neurons of the basal ganglia result in 

movement disorders. (Parkinson’s disease and Huntington chorea). 
Table 3.21: Difference between Huntigton Chorea and Parkinson's disease 

Huntington Chorea Parkinson’s Disease (PD) 

Definition & Characteristics Definition & Characteristics 

- Autosomal dominant disease movement | Hypokinetic movement disorder caused - 
disorder ch.ch. by jerky movements of all by loss of dopaminergic neurons from 
parts of the body the substantia nigra. Parkinsonism is 

- Progressive, resulting in death after an ch.ch. by tremor, rigidity, bradykinesia & 

average course of about 15 years. | instability. 

- Early cognitive symptoms may be It can be due to Parkinson’s disease 
progression to a severe dementia. (85%) or due to Viral encephalitis, 

- Behavioral changes with an increased vascular (post-stroke), Environmental 

risk of suicide. Toxin, and Drug-Induced e.g. 

antipsychotic drugs, antiemetic drug. 
While PD in most cases is sporadic, both - 

autosomal dominant and recessive 
forms of the disease also exist. 

Pathogenesis Pathogenesis 

- CAG trinucleotide repeat expansionsina | - Point mutations and duplications of the 
gene that encodes for huntingtin protein gene encoding a-synuclein, a protein 

involved in synaptic transmission, cause 
autosomal dominant PD 

Morphology Morphology 

Gross Picture Gross Picture 
The brain is small and shows striking atrophy | Pallor of the substantia nigra (left) as 
of the caudate nucleus and, sometimes less | compared to the normal (right) 

dramatically, the putamen (striatum). Lateral 
& third ventricles are dilated. 

Atrophy frequently is also seen in the frontal 
lobe, less often in the parietal lobe, and 

188 



CHAPTER lil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

occasionally in the entire cortex. 

Huntington Chorea Parkinson’s Disease (PD) 

Microscopic Picture Microscopic Picture 

Severe loss of (GABA) releasing neurons with | Loss of the pigmented catecholaminergic 
reactive gliosis. There are intra- nuclear neurons associated with gliosis. Lewy 
inclusions that contain aggregates of bodies may be found in those neurons 
ubiquitinated huntingtin protein. that remain. These are single or multiple, 

intracytoplasmic, eosinophilic, round to 
elongated inclusions that often have a 
dense core surrounded by a pale halo. 

(photo: intranuclear inclusion by They are containing a-synuciein 
immunohistochemistry, using anti-ubiquitin 
antibody. Arrow points to nucleus (Photo: Lewy body in a neuron in 
containing an inclusion close to its center). | substantia Nigra) 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

DRUG THERAPY OF PARKINSONISM 
The basal ganglia exert a tonic inhibitory effect on muscle tone & are responsible for proper 

initiation & modulation of movement. These effects require a normal balance in the basal 

ganglia between Ach & DA. 
In Parkinson's disease, degeneration of nigrostriatal DA neurons = { striatal DA & dominance 

of cholinergic system (Imbalance between Ach & DA) resulting in: 

1. Bradykinesia or akinesia. 2. Tremors 3. Rigidity. 
Drug-induced Parkinsonism: | 

1. Antipsychotics (AP) (Typical AP e.g. Haloperidol >Atypical AP)—> block D2 receptors. 

2. Antiemetics (Metoclopramide) —> block D2 receptors. 

3. Reserpine, Tetrabenazine (VMATI)—> depletes DA stores. 

4. Methyldopa (Aldomet) = inhibits DA synthesis. 
Antiparkinsonian Drugs aim to restore DA/Ach balance. 

Parkinsonism 

I. 1 Dopaminergic Activity Il. { Cholinergic Activity 
Anticholinergics. 

Dopaminergic Drugs 
e Benztropine 

1. Levodopa/carbidopa. e Trihexphenidyl 
. Dopamine Agonists: 

a. Ergot e.g. Bromocriptine 
b. Non-ergot e.g. Pramipexole, Ropinirole 

. COMT inhibitors e.g. Entacapone. 

. MAOB inhibitors e.g. Selegiline, Rasagiline. 
NMDA-R Rlarker e © Amantadine 

. Dopamine is not used because it cannot cross BBB 

180 

olr pw NJ 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

|. Dopaminergic Drugs 

Pramipeaxoie, Bromocriptine, 
ropinirole i 4 | _. pergolide 

Selegiline, 
rasagifine 

> 

Blood-brain barrier 

3-OMD ie | |-DOPA|  emem—emmm——y  Dopamine 

Entacopone, . (Carbidopa) | 
tolcapone Adverse effects 

Fig. 3.65: Pharmacologic strategies for dopaminergic therapy of Parkinson's disease. 
MAO, monoamine oxidase; COMT, catechol-O-methyltransferase; DOPAC, Dihydroxyphenylacetic acid; L- 
DOPA, levodopa; 3-OMD, 3-0O-methyldopa. (Katzung BG, 15" ed. 2021) 

1. Levodopa (L-dopa) 
eo L-dopa is a DA precursor that crosses BBB and is decarboxylated to DA in the CNS. 

It is given with the peripheral decarboxylase inhibitor, carbidopa as L-dopa/carbidopa 
(Sinemet). 

eo Carbidopa prevents peripheral decarboxylation of L-dopa to DA = { dose of L-dopa by 
75%. (without carbidopa, 99-97% of L-dopa is converted to DA peripherally which cannot 
cross BBB & T peripheral side effects of L-dopa). 

e |-dopa is the most effective antiparkinsonian drug (Mainstay of Therapy); improves all 
features especially bradykinesia®. 

Pharmacokinetic of Levodopa 
e absorbed rapidly from small intestine. 
e has short half-life (1-2 h). 
¢ Protein interferes with its transport into the GIT & CNS. So, Levodopa should be taken 

on empty stomach, 30 min before a meal. 

Adverse Effects & Contraindications (Cl) of L-dopa” 
A. Peripheral (due to T DA peripherally; 4 with carbidopa) 

* but benefits 4 in a few years due to gradual neuronal degeneration = better reserved till symptoms become 
troublesome (Controversial). 
> Other side effects: activation of malignant melanoma & mydriasis; CI: narrow angle glaucoma. 
Abrupt withdrawal of levodopa or dopaminergic drugs may — neuroleptic malignant syndrome. 

191 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

1. GIT : Nausea — vomiting Cl: active peptic ulcer. 

2. CVS: postural hypotension & arrhythmias (1 CA). 

B. Central (due to 1 DA centrally; T with carbidopa) 
1. Dyskinesia (choreoathetosis; head, lip or tongue movements). 

2. Confusion, hallucinations ; delusions... Cl: psychosis. 

C. Fluctuations in Response (due to short t x & fluctuation in L-dopa level??) 

1. On-off effect (sudden swings from mobility to bradykinesia). 

2. End-of-dose akinesia: gradual loss of effect (wearing off) before next dose. 

Management of motor complications in advanced Parkinson's disease 

A. L-dopa-induced nausea & vomiting can be managed by Domperidone (but NOT 

Metoclopramide) as antiemetic because it blocks peripheral Dz receptors in CIZ (outside 

BBB) but not central Dz receptors in basal ganglia (doesn’t cross BBB) => doesn’t interfere 

with anti-parkinsonian effect of L-dopa. 
B. L-dopa motor complications such as dyskinesias & fluctuations (end of dose akinesia & 

on/off effect), can be managed by: 
Long-acting L-dopa/carbidopa formulation (Sinemet CR) 
Add MAO-B inhibitors. 
Add DA agonists {oral or transdermal). 
Add Intermittent subcutaneous apomorphine (=> {'off' time). 

Add COMT inhibitors = J'off' time in advanced cases with motor fluctuations. 

6. Add Amantadine (mainly as Anti-dyskinesia). 

C. Management of psychosis: atypical antipsychotics clozapine or quetiapine are preferred 

(but not typical antipsychotics as Haloperidol) because they are more selective on 

mesolimbic D2 receptors preserving D2 receptors in basal ganglia = doesn’t interfere with 

anti-parkinsonian effect of L-dopa. 
Drug Interactions with levodopa: 

1. Pyridoxine (Vit. B6): T peripheral decarboxylation of L-dopa = J effect. 
2. Typical AP e.g. Haloperidol => 1 Parkinsonism 
3. MAO inhibitors = T CAT = Hypertension 

Nutritional Care in Parkinson's disease “PD”: (especially in relation to L-dopa) 

1. Avoid pyridoxine (Vit. B6): 1 peripheral decarboxylation of L-dopa = | effect. 

2. Diet: low in protein to { fluctuation in L-dopa response (NH2 acids compete with L-dopa 

= labsorption & CNS uptake). 
3. Diet rich in fibers & fluid for constipation (common in PD). 

4. Levodopa should be taken on empty stomach, 30 min before meal. 

192 

$n fa WM 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Table 3.22: Other Dopaminergic Drugs Used in Parkinsonism F 

Drug & use Mechanism of Action Adverse Effects 

I. Pramipexole e Direct D; agonists. e Similar to L-dopa: Hallucination 
Ropinirole (Less fluctuation due to —dyskinesia (less). 
Bromocriptine rapid absorption - longer tx). Nausea- postural hypotension 

(Monotherapy, or - Less effective than L- e Impulse control disorder®. 
adjuncts to L dopa) dopa e Day time sleepiness. 

-® Vasospasm & cardiac 
fibrosis (bromocriptine) 

ll. Amantadine oP DA release (mild effect) 2 | - Insomnia - hallucination. 
(Given with other enhances L-dopa effect. - Ankle edema. 
agents, Anti- e Anticholinergic effect. - Livido reticularis®. 

dyskinesia) e Blocks NMDA receptors’. 

lll. Selegiline® e Selective inhibitor of MAO-B | - Insomnia (selegiline)® 
(Monotherapy, -> delays breakdown of - Hallucination. 

modest benefit, or nigrostriatal DA => prolongs | - Very low risk of cheese 
adjuncts to L dopa) L-dopa action = { reaction’. 

fluctuation & { DOPAC 
(neuroprotective) 

IV. Entacapone!? e COMT inhibitor = { L-dopa |e Related to L-dopa /carbidopa 
(Adjunct to L dopa) peripheral metabolism = 1 -Hallucination —dyskinesia. 

its bioavailability & prolongs -Nausea- postural hypotension 
its action =» | fluctuations. |e Orange urine. 

-Non-ergot DA agonists (ropinirole, pramipexole): preferable to ergots (bromocriptine = 
vasospasm, cardiac, pulmonary & retroperitoneal fibrosis).!3 
- Stalevo: a combination of levodopa, carbidopa and entacapone for wearing-off. 
- Apomorphine: DA agonist, rapid and more effective than L-dopa. For "rescue therapy" in 
patients experiencing sudden akinetic episodes. Can also be given intermittently 
subcutaneously => {'off' time in advanced Parkinson's disease. It needs antiemetic with it. 

® Compulsive gambling & eating — hypersexuality as well as compulsive overuse of DA drugs (DA dysregulation 
Syndrome), Punding. 
7 May block glutamate receptor (NMDA) -> | glutamate excitotoxicity = J neuronal degeneration & has 

antidyskinesia action (pulsatile DA receptor stimulation —stimulate NMDA —dyskinesia). 
® Purple spotting of skin (swelling of venules due to obstruction of capillaries by small blood clots) 
® Neuroprotective, antioxidant (also |DOPAC , a toxic metabolite) = may | disease progress (more with 

rasagiline). 
10 Due to its amphetamine - like metabolites. (Rasagiline has no amphetamine like metabolites = no insomnia). 
'! Selectivity of selegiline to MAOB is lost at high doses. 
12 Tolcapone (hepatotoxic)., - Pramipexole need dose | if CrCl<50ml/min. Ropinirol (CYP1A2 metabolism). 
IJ Rotigotine: non-ergot DA agonist; skin patch allows more continuous DA stimulation; given in early PD. 
Apomorphine also is highly emetogenic and requires pre- and post-treatment antiemetic therapy 
- Istradefylline, is an analog of caffeine and a selective antagonist of the adenosine A2A receptor. It can be taken 
orally (20 or 40 mg daily) to reduce off-periods with senimet. Non-dopaminergic approved by FDA in 2019 

193 



CHAPTER Iii: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Il. Anticholinergics 
Benztropine - Trihexphenidyl 

e Block central cholinergic activity > restore DA/Ach balance. 

e Improve tremors (mainly) & rigidity, but less effective on bradykinesia. 

Used in: 

ii. Drug induced Parkinsonism: preferred to dopaminergic drugs, since dopaminergic 

agents cannot be used in antipsychotic-induced Parkinsonism because DA receptors 

are blocked by antipsychotics & dopaminergic agents may aggravate the psychotic 

disorder of the patient. 
iii. Parkinson disease (especially in the young ): adjuvants to dopaminergic drugs in cases 

presenting with tremors & to control sialorrhea. 

Side Effects: 

e Similar to atropine but less severe (dry mouth, constipation, confusion......). 

e lt may delay gastric emptying => ¥ L-dopa absorption. 

Caution in elderly (avoid in patients over 70 yrs) 

e 1 Memory loss & hallucinations, Urine retention in enlarged prostate. 

If anticholinergics are contraindicated: 
- Beta adrenergic blockers e.g., propranolol may be used for tremors. 

- Sialorrhea can be treated Locally by botulinum toxin injections, and sublingual atropine. 

Choice of druin gEarsly Parkinson's Disease'* (NICE guidelines, 2017) 

e First choice agents in Parkinson's disease (PD) & motor symptoms include: 

- L-dopa/carbidopa. 
- Non ergot dopamine agonists (oral/transdermal). 

- MAO-B inhibitors. 
1. Offer levodopa to people in the early stages of PD whose motor symptoms impact on 

their quality of life. (The most effective agent for motor symptoms) 

2. Consider a choice of dopamine agonists, levodopa or monoamine oxidase B (MAO-B) 

inhibitors for people in the early stages of PD whose motor symptoms do not impact on 

their quality of life. 
3. Do not offer ergot-derived dopamine agonists as first-line treatment for PD. 

Amantadine: is used mainly as anti-dyskinesia (If dyskinesia is not adequately managed by 

modifying existing therapy, consider amantadine, NICE 2017). 

Anti-cholinergics: it may be added if tremors are troublesome, especially in young patients. 

14 Therapy with 2 or more agents will eventually be necessary as disease progresses. 

Management of depression by antidepressants. 
Management of dementia: Rivastigmine. 

194 



CHAPTER lll: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

THE CEREBELLUM 

ANATOMY OF CEREBELLUM 
e [tis the largest part of the hindbrain. 
e |tlies inthe posterior cranial fossa with the tentorium cerebelli roofing over and separating 

it from the cerebrum. It lies posterior to the pons and medulla with the cavity of the fourth 
ventricle intervening. 

e [tt has two notches; an anterior notch which lodges the pons and medulla, and a posterior 
notch that lodges the falx cerebelli. 

e Itis formed of two cerebellar hemispheres joined by a median narrow part, the vermis. 
e The surface of the cerebellum shows many fissures. A deep fissure, the horizontal fissure, 

lies along the margin of the cerebellum and separates the superior from the inferior 
surface. 

Surfaces of thec erebellum (Figs. 3.66 & 3.67) 
I. Superior Surface: 

It shows the superior vermis raised more than the cerebellar hemispheres. It also shows a 
deep fissure, Fissura prima, that separates anterior lobe of cerebellum from posterior lobe 
of cerebellum. 

II. Inferior Surface: 
The inferior vermis is present in a deep groove, vallecula that lies between the two 
cerebellar hemispheres. A posterolateral fissure separates the posterior lobe from the 
flocculo-nodular lobe. 

Ant. cerebellar notch 

Nfissure 
| mC 

Post. cerebellar notch 
Post. cerebellar notch 

Fig. 3.66 upper surface of cerebellum Fig. 3.67: lower surface of cerebellum 

195 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Lobes of the Cerebellum 

Anatomically the cerebellum is divided into 3 lobes: 

Anterior lobe in front of the fissura prima, Posterior lobe behind fissura prima, and 

Flocculonodular lobe separated from posterior lobe by the posterolateral fissure. 

Functionally the Cerebellum is also divided into 3 lobes (Fig. 3.68): 

1. Archicerebellum 
- Its connections are vestibular. 

Paleocerebelinm 
- Itis concerned with equilibrium. 
- |tis formed of 2 Flocculi + Nodule Yermal part 

(part of inf. Vermis) Paravermal 
2. Paleocerebellum 

- Its connections are spinal (spino | | Neoc 
cerebellar). Fig. 3.68: Functional lobes 

- This region receives proprioceptive input the body and a copy of the motor plan from 

the motor cortex. It is concerned with coordination of movement. 
- |tis formed of 3 parts: 

a. Vermal part includes the whole vermis. It has connections to the trunk muscles of 

both sides via the fastigial nucleus. 
b. 2 paravermal parts of the cerebellar hemispheres: are connected to the distal limb 

muscles of the same side via the globose and emboliform nuclei. 

3. Neocerebellum 
- Its connections are cortico-ponto-cerebellar & projects to the contralateral cerebral 

cortex via the dentate nucleus. 
- [It interacts with motor cortex in planning & programming movement. 

- It is formed of the most lateral parts of cerebellar hemispheres. 
Notes: 
e Each cerebellar hemisphere is connected with the ipsilateral side of the body or the 

contralateral cerebral hemisphere. 
Blood Supply of Cerebellum 

Arteries: one artery to the upper surface & 2 arteries to 

the lower surface (Fig. 3.69): cerebellar arteries) Superior 
cerebellar artery 

1. Superior Cerebellar a. (br. of basilar) Anterior inferior 

2. Anterior-inferior Cerebellar a. (br. of basilar) cerebellar artery 

3. Posterior-inferior Cerebellar a. (br. of vertebral) 
Posterior inferior 

Veins: cerebellar artery 

1. Superior Cerebellar veins => drain into venous Fig. 3.69: cerebellar arteries 

sinuses (Straight & transverse} & into great 
cerebral vein 

2. Inferior Cerebellar Veins = drain into venous sinuses (Straight, sigmoid, occipital & inf. 

petrosal). 

196 



CHAPTER iii: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Cerebellar peduncles: 
Three pairs of peduncles attach cerebellum to the brain stem. 

Inferior cerebellar Peduncle: 
It connects cerebellum to medulla. It is formed mostly of 
afferent fibers. 

Afferent Fibers: (Fig. 3.70) 
1. Posterior Spinacerebellar tract (from ipsilateral 

Clarke's nucleus). 
2. Dorsal external arcuate fibers = Cuneo-cerebellar 

(from accessory cuneate nucleus). 
. Ventral external arcuate fibers (from arcuate nucleus). 

4. Olivo-cerebellar fibers (from the inferior olivary 
nucleus). 

5. Para-olivo-cerebellar fibers (from dorsal & medial 
accessory olivary nuclei). 

6. Vestibulo-cerebellar fibers (from the vestibular nuclei 
& vestibular ganglion). 

7. Reticulo-cerebellar fibers (from the reticular 
formation. 

Efferent Fibers: (Fig. 3.71) 
1. Cerebello-vestibular Fibers (from flocculonodular lobe to 

vestibular nuclei). 
2. Cerebello-reticular Fibers (to the reticular 

formation) 
3. Cerebello-olivary Fibers (to the inferior olive) 

Fig. 3.71: ICP (efferents) 
Middle Cerebellar peduncle: (Fig. 3.72) 
The largest peduncle. Connects the cerebellum to the pons. 
Contains cortico-ponto-cerebellar fibers. 

(6 
Cartico- 

tC 2\ ponto - 
cerebellar 

\ 

poe 

Fig. 3.72.: MCP 

197 

Lad 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Superior Cerebellar Peduncle: (Fig. 3.73) 
Connects cerebellum to mid-brain. It is 
formed mostly of efferent fibers. 

Afferent Fibers: 
1. Anterior Spinocerebellar tract 
2. Tecto-cerebellar tract (from the superior 

colliculus) 

Efferent Fibers: Tecte: NA i 
Dentato-t ic 

1. Fastigio-reticular fibers (from fastigial Gareth Nt 

nucleus to the reticular formation. rebelio-rubral 

2. Cerebello-rubral fibers (from globose & ; 
Fastigio-reticular 

emboliform nuclei) to red nucleus. Anterior spino- 

3. Dentato-thalamic fibers (to VLN of cerebellar fibers 

thalamus) & dentate-rubro-thalamic 
fibers (to the same nucleus of the Fig. 3.73: SCP 
thalamus via the red nucleus. 

198 



CHAPTER lil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Histological Structure of the Cerebellum 
The cerebellum is formed of: 

I) Gray matter, that includes: 
a) The outer cortex. 
b) Four pairs of intrinsic cerebellar nuclei. 

II) White matter: formed of afferent and efferent fibers. 
Cerebellar cortex (Fig. 3.74): 
it is composed of narrow laminae or folia. Each folium contains a core of white matter covered 
by a gray matter. 
The cerebellar cortex is formed of the following three layers: 

I) Molecular layer: the outermost layer. It contains two types of cells: 
a) Outer stellate cells: 

These cells are found in the superficial part of the molecular layer. They have small 
cell bodies with short dendrites located in the same layer. Their axons pass parallel 
to the surface of the cerebellum, to synapse with the dendrites of Purkinje cells. 

b) Basket cells: 
These cells are found deep in the molecular layer. Their dendrites are found in the 
same layer. Their axons form basket-like terminal arborizations around Purkinje cell 
bodies, where a single cell makes synapse with many cells up to 10 cells. 
e Fibers of the molecular layer: This layer contains: 

a) Dendritic arborizations and axons of its own cells. 
b) The dendrites of cells in the deeper layers {Purkinje cells and Golgi type I cells). 
c) Climbing fibers, the afferent fibers to the cerebellum. 
d) Axons of granule cells. 
e) Recurrent axons of Purkinje cells. 

cerebellar cortex 
Golght call 

basket cell 
a 

TEAWEAR RPS yg BR ES EEE REE FAREED EE 

| Purkinje csll layer 
a Eeen  oS

i EATERS Ees lesa sade wenn 

granule 
cell layer 

WE em miatct i XT TSE 
WRAs TDs a - 

Eww 
-= 

TES erent ny go. 
a 

dE EER, 
[] 

Cf climbing fiber 
Purkinje 
call 

granule call mossy fiber 

Fig. 3.74: Layers of the Cerebellar Cortex 

199 



CHAPTER lil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Purkinje cell layer: (Fig.3.75) 

e itis the middle layer of the cerebellar cortex. it is formed 

of one type of cells (Purkinje cell), arranged uniformly in 

a single plane along the upper margin of granular layer. 

e Each cell has a large pyriform, flask-shaped cell body. It 
has a vesicular central nucleus and coarse cytoplasmic 
Nissl’s granules. 

e Their dendrites form an elaborate fan-like flattened 
dendritic tree, at right angles to the long axis of folia. 
These dendrites branch to give rise to primary, secondary 
and tertiary branches. Both primary and secondary 

branches are smooth, while the tertiary branches show 

spines or gemmules. 

e Purkinje cell axons are myelinated passing through the 

granular layer and white matter to synapse with deep 

cerebellar nuclei. They represent the efferent pathway 

from the cortex. 

Fig. 3.75: Purkinje cells 
ll) Granular layer: 

It is formed of closely packed cells separated by non-cellular 
spaces called cerebellar islands (Glomeruli). 
There are two types of cells: 
a) Granule cells: 

These are small cells having large rounded nuclei and thin rim of cytoplasm with few 

Nissl’s bodies. Their dendrites show claw like endings that terminate in the 

glomerulus. Their axons ascend to the molecular layer, where they bifurcate to give 

rise to parallel fibers that run parallel to the surface. They synapse with the 

dendrites of Purkinje cells. 
b) Golgi type Ii cells: 

These are found in the upper parts of the granular layer. Their dendrites extend in all 

layers of the cortex, while their axons end within the cerebellar glomeruli. 
Cerebellar islands (Glomeruli) { Fig. 3.76): 

These are irregularly dispersed pale non cellular areas, composed of a complex 

synaptic structure. Each glomerulus is formed of: 

1) Mossy fiber terminal. 
2) Dendrites of numerous granule cells. 
3) Axons of Golgi type li cells. 

Function: This structure excites granular cells which in turn excite Purkinje cells. Axons of 

granule cells (unmyelinated fibers), ascend vertically to the molecular layer and synapses 

with Purkinje cell dendrites. Granule cells are the only excitatory neurons in the cerebellar 

cortex. 

N.B: 

200 



CHAPTER III: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

e Purkinje cells are the key cells in the cerebellar cortex. They receive 2 types of afferent 
fibers: Climbing fibers directly from the olivary nuclei & Mossy fibers which include all 
other cerebellar afferents which relay first on granule cells. 

oe Purkinje cell axons are inhibitory to cerebellar nuclei which send all cerebellar 
efferents. All purkinje cells discharge to cerebellar nuclei except in the flocculonodular 
lobe where they discharge directly to vestibular nuclei. 

~Parallel fibers 

mn) 

Basket cel! 

Golgi cell |] 

y \ 
| \ —— Purkinje cell oxon 

« 
[iil 

1 Granule 
cells 

/ — Deep cerebellar 
9 nucle 

. € 
[ Climbing Lat vest nuclei 

fiber ; 
Mossy fiber 

Fig. 3.76:The cerebellar island (glomerulus) 

The white matter of the cerebellum: 4 

It includes the afferent and the efferent fibers of the cerebellum. 
1) Afferent fibers: are mainly via ICP and MCP. 

a. Climbing fibers: these are the olivocerebellar fibers. These pass from the white 

matter through the granular and Purkinje cell layer to reach dendrites of Purkinje cells. 
These non-myelinated fibers give branches and climb the smooth dendritic branches 
of Purkinje cells. Stimulation of the climbing fibers excites the Purkinje cells. 

b. Mossy fibers: they include all the afferents except the olivocerebellar fibers. 

a) Spinocerebellar tracts. 

b) Cuneocerebellar tract. 
c) Vestibulocerebellar 
d) Pontocerebellar fibers. 
e) Reticulo-cerebellar. 
f) Ventral external arcuate fibers. 

201 

| 

| 

l 
i) z= i, 

Eses  ee —— 



CHAPTER lll: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

These fibers enter the white matter of the cerebellum, then they enter the granular 
layer of the cortex, where they give collaterals and fine lobulated enlargements or 
rosettes. Each rosette forms the center of a cerebellar glomerulus. 

2) Efferent fibers: 
a. Some axons of Purkinje cells project to deep cerebellar nuclei, other axons project to 

vestibular nuclei. 
b. Fibers from deep cerebellar nuclei project to vestibular nuclei. 

Deep cerebellar nuclei (Fig. 3.78) 
These are four pairs embedded in Facto 

astgial 
the cerebellar white matter, these nucleus 
Include: dentate, emboliform, | Clobese nucleus 
fastigial and globose nuclei. — Emboliform Nucleus 

1) Dentate nucleus: This is the interpositus 

largest nucleus; it is a 
convoluted mass of gray matter 
like a folded bag with a hilus 
directed medially. \ x “ 

2) Emboliform nucleus: It is Po, 
wedge shaped cell mass medial nucleus 
to dentate nucleus. 

3) Globose nucleus: It is a 
rounded cell group medial to Sulcus valleculae | — Sulcus valleculae 

Infenor vermis 
emboliform nucleus. 

4) Fastigial nucleus: This is the most Fig. 3.78: Deep Cerebellar Nuclei 
medial nucleus near the midline. 
e The largest afferents to deep cerebellar nuclei are from the Purkinje cells. 
e Function: Regulation of muscle tone and coordination of movement. 

Physiology of the cerebellum 
The cerebellum (little brain) is a pure motor structure: 
it represents about 11% of brain mass and located dorsal to the pons and medulla. 

- It controls fine movement coordination, balance and equilibrium and muscle tone. 
- its lesions cause a movement incoordination syndrome called motor ataxia. 
- It differs from the cerebrum in: 

1- Cerebellum is not involved in sensory perception. 
2- Cerebellar lesion as in B.G lesion is not associated with paralysis. 
3- Cerebellar representation is of the ipsilateral side of the body. 
4- The body is represented in vermis and intermediate part of cerebellar hemisphere in 

2 maps: In the upper map (ant. Lobe), body is represented ipsilaterally and upside- 

down. In lower map (post. Lobe), body is represented ipsilaterally and upright. Audio- 

visual representation is bilateral and upright. 
Connections of the cerebellum 
Afferent (input) nerve fibers to the cerebellum: The cerebellum receives both sensory and 

motor information through many afferent tracts. 

202 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Outputs from the cerebellum: They originate from the cerebellar deep nuclei. Thus, a lesion 
to the cerebellar nuclei has the same effect as a complete lesion of the entire cerebellum. 

Functional division of the cerebellum in relation to deep cerebellar nuclei and their outputs: 
1. Vestibulocerebellum: Most of its output passes directly to brainstem where it relays to the 

vestibular nuclei. 
2. Spinocerebellum: 

» Output from the vermis through fastigial nucleus—> brainstem. 
» Output from intermediate zone of cerebellar hemisphere through interposed nucleus to 

a) VA & VL nuclei of thalamus, then to cerebral cortex, b) several midline structures of 
the thalamus, then to basal ganglia and the reticular formation and red nucleus. 

3. Cerebrocerebellum: 
Projects to dentate nucleus VA & VL nuclei of thalamus, then to cerebral cortex. 

Spinocerebelium 

_nm vermis — 

intermediate = = 0 aa 
7 hanisphaie [ 

Cerebrocerebellum , 35 
Lateral RenWsDiver es Tn i EEN 

be 2 a0 a 

\ =  wvestibulo- 
= cerebellum 

= + 
To frontal TO TO To 
motor areas lateral medial vestibular 

sysetms sysetms nuclei 

Motor Motor Eve mvt & 
Planning execution balance 

Fig. 3.79: Functional division of the cerebellum in relation to deep cerebellar nuclei and their 
Functional unit of the cerebellar cortex-The purkinje and deep nuclear cells outputs. 

oe Molecular 
layer 

Purkinje Purkinje 2 
cell cell layer S 

Climbing - Granule 

Deep | I Gra A 
nuclear x cells } qu 

cell [Fe 
Excitation} | Mossy 

fiber 
A 

input {all other afferents) 
(inferior alive) 

Qutput 

Fig.3.80: showing the deep cerebellar nuclei receiving excitatory inputs from mossy and 
climbing fibers and inhibitory inputs from Purkinje cell 

203 



CHAPTER III: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

» The afferent inputs to the cerebellum are mainly of two types. Climbing fiber type and 

mossy fiber type. 
> Climbing fibers all originate from inferior olives of the medulla. (releasing aspartate) 

» The mossy fibers are all the other fibers that enter the cerebellum from multiple sources- 

the higher brain, brain stem, and spinal cord. (releasing glutamate) 

> The output from the whole cerebellum is from the deep nuclear cells. These cells are 

continuously under both excitatory and inhibitory influences. 

» The excitatory influences arise from direct connections with afferent fibers that enter the 

cerebellum from the brain or the periphery. 
» The inhibitory influence arises entirely from the Purkinje cell in the cortex of the 

cerebellum (releasing GABA) 
» Normally, the balance between these two effects is slightly in favor of excitation so that 

under quiet condition, output from the deep nuclear cell remains relatively constant at a 

moderate level of continuous stimulation. 

Turn-on/turn-off output signals from the cerebellum: 

General organization of neuronal connections in the cerebellum 

Efferent axon Neuronal circuitry within 

jeaving 
the cerebellar cortex is not 

cerebellum Cerebellar shown in this diagram 
cortex 

Purkinje 
cell 

One of the central nuclei 
Afferent axon 
entering of the cerebellum 

cerebellum + = excitation (glutamate) | 
— = inhibition (GABA) 

Fig.3.81: showing the general organization of neuronal connections in the cerebellum 

A- In execution of well learned rapid motor movement: 

the initiating signal from the cerebral motor cortex or brain stem at first greatly 

increases deep nuclear cell excitation. Then, another few milliseconds later, feedback 

inhibitory signals from the Purkinje cell circuit arrive. In this way, there is first a rapid 

excitatory signal sent by the deep nuclear cells into the motor output pathway to 

enhance the motor movement, followed within another small fraction of a second by 

an inhibitory signal. This inhibitory signal resembles a delay-line negative feedback 

signal of the type that is effective in providing damping. That is, when the motor system 

is excited, a negative feedback signal occurs after a short delay to stop the muscle 

movement from overshooting its mark. Otherwise, oscillation of the movement would 

Occur. 

204 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

B- During training on new voluntary motor act 
v' During training on a new movement, Inferior olivary nucleus functions as an 

"error detector." It receives signals from motor cortex, basal ganglia, reticular formation. 
It compares these signals from brain with those from spinal cord and informs the 
cerebellum via olivocerebellar pathway through climbing fibers. 

v' This direct powerful activation of the target Purkinje cells through the climbing 
fibers and the increase in calcium influx in Purkinje cells (is called conditioning) results 
in powerful activation of Purkinje cells releasing GABA and inhibits the neurons of 
deep cerebellar nuclei hopefully terminating the unwanted component of the action. 

v" when the movement become familiar movement inputs from climbing fibers 
become of low frequency (1spike/sec) and have a minor influence on the overall firing 
rate of the Purkinje cell where the effect of mossy fibers is clearer causing Purkinje cell 
basal firing with high frequency (70 spike /sec). 

N.B.: Cerebellar circuits are characterized by: 
1) No reverberators in these circuits so cerebellar effects are transient. 
2) During activity output signal from cerebellum is initial transient excitation followed by 

sudden transient inhibition. 

Table 3.23: Comparison between Mossy and climbing fibers 

a Tramcmittoar le califtsrrm ates 
@. Transmitter 1S Q lutan Nave 

3a .. 

Functions of the Cerebellum 

1- Controls equilibrium and body posture: 
Input: it receives inputs signals from vestibular receptors in inner ear with movement of 
head and from proprioceptors 
Output: its output is through ({fastigial nucleus) to the vestibulospinal tract and 
reticulospinal tract 
Effects: 

205 



CHAPTER Hil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

A- by affecting the axial muscles (trunk and girdle muscles) mainly during movements that 
involve changes in body directions. 

B- it modulates commands to motor neurons to compensate for shifts in body position or 
changes in load upon muscles. 

C- Control balance between agonist and antagonist muscles during rapid change in body 
position. 

2- Controls eye movements (vestibulo-ocular reflex): 
It receives afferent from superior colliculus and visual cortex and its output Through 

vestibular 
nuclei in medulla to medial longitudinal fasciculus to external ocular muscles. 

Creve=o Wisuvunail cortex 

== I geniculate 
nucleus 

Ocuiormotor, trochlear, 
abducens nuclei 

— nA rn 

TES = 

x a Carabeaeliurm 

vestibular nucleus 5 

Fig.3.82: showing pathway for vestibulo-ocular reflex 

N.B.: In people with vestibulocerebellar dysfunction, equilibrium is far more disturbed during 
performance of movement, especially when these movements involve changes in direction of 
movement and stimulate the semicircular ducts. Lesion in vestibulocerebellum result in truncal 
ataxia and drunken gait. Vertigo and vomiting are common associating symptoms 

In medulloblastoma, tumor common in children affecting vestibulocerebellum no ability to 
stand without support and high incidence of truncal ataxia. 

3- Coordination of voluntary movement: 
Most movements are composed of a number of different muscle groups acting together 
in a temporally coordinated fashion. One major function of the cerebellum is to 
coordinate the timing and force of these different muscle groups to produce fluid limb 
or body movements. 

206 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

A) The spinocerebellum ensures coordination of voluntary movement through 
the following: 
a- Servo-comparator function: 

Fig.3.83: showing servocomparator function of Spinocerebellum 

v" The spinocerebellum receives two types of information when a movement is 
performed: 
(1) Information from the cerebral motor cortex (area 4) and from the midbrain 

red nucleus, through pontine nuclei {in cortico-ponto- cerebellar tract) 
reach to spinocerebellum (efference copy) telling the cerebellum the 
intended sequential plan of movement for the next few fractions of a 
second, and 

(2) Feedback information from the body (tension in tendon, length of muscle, 
change in length) through dorsal spinocerebellar tract telling the 
cerebellum what actual movements result. (afference copy) 

(3) copy of the actual motor control signals that reach anterior motor neurons. 
(reafference copy) carried in ventral spinocerebellar tract. 

v' After the spinocerebellum has compared the intended movement with the 
actual movements, the deep nuclear cells of the fastigial nucleus & interposed 
nucleus send corrective output signals that has braking function to prevent 
overshooting {hypermetria). 

v' This output signals are: 
1) Back to the cerebral motor cortex through relay nuclei in the thalamus. 
2) To the lower portion of red nucleus that gives rise to the rubrospinal tract. 
3) Brainstem areas that give rise to medial brainstem pathways. 

N.B.: Similar comparative signals also go to the inferior olivary complex to correct 
newly learned voluntary movement 

» Control of ballistic movements: 
Ballistic movements are those which occur very rapidly e.g. fingers during typing 
or piano playing and the eyes during reading. They are pre-planned to go to a 
specific distance then stop, but because of their high rapidity, the servo 

207 



CHAPTER Iii: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

comparator mechanism cannot operate. The Mossy circuit is important in this 

condition as it detects the turn on (initiation), duration (according to what is 

planned by the brain) and finally turn off (termination) of movement. The built- 

in timing circuits of the cerebellar cortex are fundamental to this particular ability 
of the cerebellum. 

b- Damping function: 
v' Almost all movements of the body are pendular. For instance, when an arm is 

moved, momentum develops, and the momentum must be overcome before the 

movement can be stopped. Because of momentum, all pendular movements 

have a tendency to overshoot. 
v If overshooting occurs in person whose cerebellum has been destroyed, the 

conscious centers of the cerebrum eventually recognize this occurrence and 

initiate movement in the reverse direction to attempt to bring the arm to the 

intended position. However, the arm, by virtue of its momentum, overshoots 

once more in the opposite direction, and appropriate corrective signals must 
again be instituted. 

v' Thus, the arm oscillates back and forth past its intended point for several cycles 
before it finally fixes on its mark. This effect is called an action tremor or intention 
tremors. 

v If the cerebellum is intact, appropriate learned, subconscious signals stop the 
movement precisely at the intended point by contraction of agonist and 
antagonist, thereby preventing the overshoot and the tremor. 

B) The role of cerebrocerebellum in the control of voluntary movement: 
a- Planning of sequential movements: 
v' The planning of sequential movements requires that the lateral zones of the 

hemispheres communicate with both the premotor and sensory portions of the 
cerebral cortex, and it requires two-way communication between these 

cerebral cortex areas with the corresponding areas of the basal ganglia. 
v It seems that the plan of sequential movements actually begins in the sensory 

and premotor areas of the cerebral cortex, and from there the plan is 
transmitted to the lateral zones of the cerebellar hemispheres. 

v' Then, amid much two- way traffic between the cerebellum and the cerebral 

cortex, appropriate motor signals provide transition from one sequence of 

movement to the next. 
b- Predictive function: 

v" The cerebrocerebellum predicts the next movement at the same time a present 

movement is occurring. This function is necessary for smooth transition from 
one movement to the next (thus joining the sequential movements and 
preventing decomposition). 

¢- Timing function for sequential movements: 
v' An important function of the cerebrocerebellum is to provide appropriate 

timing for each succeeding movement. Without this timing capability, the 
person becomes unable to determine when the next sequential movement 
needs to begin. 

208 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

v' As a result, the succeeding movement may begin too early or, more likely, too 
late. 

d- Extra motor predictive functions of the cerebrocerebellum: 
v" The cerebrocerebelium helps to time events other than movements of the 

body. For instance, the rates of progression of both auditory and visual 
phenomena can be predicted by the brain, but both require cerebellar 
participation. 

v" As an example, a person can predict from the changing visual scene how 
rapidly he is approaching an object (e.g.: the time which you will hit the 
tennis ball when it touches the table). 

C) Control of stretch reflex 
The neocerebellum is excitatory to stretch reflex by increasing activity in pontine 
reticulospinal tract and increasing the gamma neuron discharge to muscle spindles 
increasing muscle tone. While the neocerebellum inhibits the stretch reflex by 
acting through medullary reticulospinal tract. However, the excitatory effect is 
predominant. So, cerebellar lesions is associated with hypotonia and pendular knee 
jerk. 

Cerebellar Lesions 

The manifestations of neocerebellar syndrome (ataxia) occur in the same side of the lesion 

a. Hypotonia: because neocerebellum is facilitatory to muscle tone, its lesion leads to 
pendular knee jerk and lateral flexion of the body to the affected side. 

b. Motor Ataxia: means incoordination of movement due to error in rate, range, force and 
direction of movement. It is manifested by: 

o Dysmetria 
e [ntention tremors (Kinetic tremors) 
e Cerebellar nystagmus 
Decomposition of movements 
Dysdiadochokinesis 
Dysarthria (scanning or Staccato speech) 

Disturbance of posture and gait 
Rebound 

Dysmetria is poor control of distance of movement e.g. when attempting to touch an 
object e.g. nose with a finger, overshooting of the intended point (hypermetria or post 
pointing) or stoppage short before the intended point (hypometria) occurs. Dysmetria 
is due to failure of the damping and timing functions. Dysmetria results in in- 
coordinated movements (ataxia). 
Intention (Kinetic) tremors are involuntary tremors which occur mainly at the distal 
joints. They occur mainly during the movements especially at its end and disappear 
during rest & sleep. Truncal tremors are called titubation. 

209 

AN 



CHAPTER lil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

v' Cerebellar nystagmus is tremors of the eyeballs which occur during a trial to fix an 
object to the side of the lesion. It is due to intention tremors of eye muscles due to 
absence of damping function. 

v' Decomposition of movements is the inability to perform successive components of a 
complex motor act i.e. " complex" movements are decomposed into many "steps". So, 
if the patient is asked to move his right heel upon the left leg (heel-knee test) from 
knee to ankle, he makes it in 3 steps. 

v' Adiadochokinesis or dysdiadochokinesia is the inability to perform rapid successive 
opposite movements e.g. pronation and supination of the forearm or flexion & 
extension of the fingers. This is due to failure of predictive and smooth progression 

function. 
v' Dysarthria (scanning or Staccato speech): Slow interrupted (decomposed) speech due 

to disturbance in coordination of muscles of speech as formation of words needs rapid 
& highly coordinated succession of contractions of the muscles of larynx, oral and 
respiratory muscles. So, words may be long or short, loud or weak. 

v' Rebound is the overshooting of limb when a resistance of movement is removed. This 
is elicited by asking the patient to flex his forearm against resistance. When the 
resistance is suddenly removed, the limb overshoots and strikes the patient face (loss 
of braking mechanism). 

Finish 

Fig. 3.84: Dysmetria and decomposition of movement shown by patient moving his 
arm from a raised position to his nose. Tremor increases on approaching the nose. 

ATAXIA 

This is incoordination of voluntary movements in absence of paralysis. It is either sensory or 
motor. 

1. Sensory ataxia: This occurs as a result of lesions of the proprioceptive sensory 
pathways, commonly in the dorsal column of the spinal cord (the gracile & cuneate 
tracts). 

2. Motor ataxia: This is due to defects in the coordinating system of voluntary 
movements. It commonly occurs in lesions of the neocerebellum or spinocerebellar 
tracts. 

210 



CHAPTER lil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

N.B In MOTOR ATAXIA: lesion of vermis the ataxia is in both sides, but if it affects the 
hemisphere, it will be unilateral with deviation of body towards the diseased side 

Table 3.24: Comparison between sensory and motor ataxia 
Sensory ataxia Motor ataxia 

Definition Incoordination of movement Incoordination of 
due to loss of proprioception | movements due to 
sensations cerebellar lesion 

Most common cause | Tabes dorsalis Cerebellar disease 
Gait High steppage (stamping) Zigzag like gate 
Romberg's sign Positive Negative 
Effect of vision Corrected by vision Not affected by vision 
Deep sensations Impaired or lost Normal 
Tremors Absent Kinetic tremors present 
Nystagmus Absent Present 
Speech Normal Scanning or staccato due to 

incoordination of palatal 
laryngeal muscles 

What are the types of tremors that you know? 
1. The static tremors of the parkisonism. It occurs during rest. 
2. The kinetic tremors of the neocerebellar syndrome. It occurs during movements due to 

loss of the damping function of the cerebellum. 
3. Tremors that occur in outstretched hand in hyperthyroidism. 

What are the abnormal types of "gaits" that you know? 
1. Spastic gait (circumduction) of upper motor neuron lesion i.e. patient walks on a narrow 

base and has difficulty in bending his knee, drags his feet and the foot is raised by tilting 
the pelvis. 

2. Scissoring gait (spastic gait of both lower limbs) in paraplegia 
. Stamping gait in deep sensory loss. 

4. Drunken gait in archicerebellar lesion i.e. patient walk on a wide base, short steps and 
swinging from side to side and looking to the ground. This is due to disturbance in 
equilibrium due to the lesion. 

5. Shuffling gait of Parkinsonism, small steps with inability to step suddenly. 
6. Zigzag like gait of the neocerebeliar syndrome. 

Cerebellar tumors 

Many tumors affect the posterior fossa involving brain stem, cerebellar pontine angle, fourth 
ventricle, and cerebellum. Metastatic lesions to the cerebellum are also common. Only 
medulloblastoma and hemangioblastoma are going to be discussed in this chapter. 

Medulloblastoma, WHO Grade IV 

211 

$5) 



CHAPTER lik: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

v" An embryonal neuroepithelial tumor arising in the cerebellum or dorsal brain stem, 

presenting mainly in childhood. 
v' Medulloblastoma is the most common CNS embryonal tumor. 
v' It is now classified into molecular (i.e. genetic) variants as well as morphological variants, 

all with clinical utility. 
Gross: Most medulloblastomas arise in the region of the cerebellar vermis, as pink or grey 

often friable masses that fill the fourth ventricle. Medulloblastomas located in the 
cerebellar hemispheres tend to be firm and more circumscribed, and generally 
correspond to the desmoplastic/ nodular variant. Small foci of necrosis can be grossly 
evident, but extensive necrosis is rare. 

Microscopic: Several morphological variants of medulloblastoma are recognized: 

e Classic. 
e Desmoplastic/nodular medulloblastoma. 
e Medulloblastoma with extensive nadularity. 
e Large cell / anaplastic medulloblastoma. 

Classic medulloblastomas show densely packed small round cells with mild to moderate 
nuclear pleomorphism and a high mitotic count. Some cases show Homer-Wright rosette 

characterized by primitive tumor cells surrounding central neuropil (Fig. 3.85). 

Genetic analysis 
e Genetic analysis of medulloblastoma has revealed that morphologically similar tumors 

commonly exhibit distinct alterations, and that there is a relationship between these 
genetic alterations and outcome. 

¢ In addition to the histologic variant, it is now important to also list the molecular 
subtype, within the integrated WHO diagnosis for each case. 

e The most common cytogenetic aberration, identified in 40% to 50% of 

medulloblastomas, is a loss of the short arm of chromosome 17 (17p). This is often 
accompanied by duplication of the long arm, resulting in an isochromosome 17q. 

e Overall, most favorable genetic subtype is WNT- activated, which is rarest molecular 
subtype (10%) , and recognized by nuclear B-catenin. 

Fig. 3.85: Medulloblastoma. Left; hypercellular neoplasm, Middle: frequent mitoses, 

Right: Homer-Wright rosettes. 

Hemangioblastoma,W HO grade | 
Hemangioblastoma is a benign slow growing tumor of adults, typically occurring in cerebellum 
(most common), brain stem, and spinal cord. 

212 



CHAPTER lit: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Hemangioblastomas occur in sporadic forms {accounting for -70% of cases) and in association 
with the inherited von Hippel-Lindau disease (VHL) (accounting for -30% of cases). The VHL 
tumor suppressor gene is inactivated both in VHL-associated cases and in most sporadic cases. 

Gross: 
e Most hemangioblastomas are well-circumscribed, partly cystic, highly vascularized lesions 

(60%); about 40% are completely solid. 
e Occasionally, the tumor is yellow due to rich lipid content. 
e The classic appearance is that of a cyst with a solid vascular nodule that abuts a pial surface 

(Fig. 3.85) 

Microscopic (Fig. 3.86): 

e Hemangioblastomas are characterized by two main components: (1) neoplastic stromal 
cells that are characteristically large and vacuolated and (2) abundant vascular cells. 

e Numerous thin-walled vessels are apparent. 
e [ntratumoural haemorrhage may occur. 
e The exact origin of these stromal cells is still controversial. 

Fig. 3.86: MRI shows a cerebellar hemangioblastoma with an enhancing mural nodules. 
Microscopically, the tumor exhibits stromal cells with clear, vacuolated cytoplasm due to 

accumulation of lipid droplets. 

213 



CHAPTER lil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

History taking skills in neurology 
« Setprovisional diagnosis. 

* Guide examination and investigations ... allows focused examination 

» Listen tothe patient, he is telling you the diagnosis. 

e But remember that: “the eyes see what mind knows” 

Whatllookfor 

e Personal history: 

eo Family history: 

e Pasthistory 

e Complaint 

e InHPI: you have to answer where is the lesion and what is the lesion? 

Anatomical (where?) Can the findings be explained by: one lesion, multiple lesions, diffuse 
or systemic process? = focal, multi focal, disseminated, diffuse or systemic 

>>> What level/levels of the nervous systems is/are affected. 

—— Erte 

ERgnmenl Cramergyiies 

ei. ~~ 1a J -0A 190] 

ESraniry tsar 

— Fhpyirvani Ow rci 

Pull cpap— 

—— ee — 

73 Ca muscles SRC 

Etiological (what?) Once you have come to an anatomical synthesis, consider what 
pathological processes could have caused that. 

COrvmet Yeasowhne Hpilepitlo RMigrainous inflammatory irvfeoative Neoplastic Drage rvarat ves Ch aervert bes Zorrgersitmi 

Soooncdn : : 

Minutes iy 

Hour 

Dave : 

elie beam © 

Months : : : 

Points to be answered by examination: 

*General 

* Neurological 

214 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Neurological examination 

History comes first 
. in neurological clinical practice, history taking is the major clinical skill in formulating a 

proper diagnosis 
. “if you were not able to postulate a PROVISIONAL site and nature of the pathology in ) 

nervous system after history taking >>> please revise the history of the patient” 
. From the history we should be able to answer 2 important questions: 

1. Where is the problem ? (brain .... Spinal cord ... peripheral nerve ... etc) 
2. What is the nature of the problem ? (vascular, Congenital, inflammatory, 

neoplastic, degenerative,...etc) 
 Theexamination would test forthe hypothesis generated after history taking. 

Motor system examination 

Basic motor system pathway 

Spinal cond segment 

UMNL vs LMNL 

215



CHAPTER lil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

UMNL LMNL B f- 
Lesion Above the anterior horn cell in the spinal Anterior horn cell, motor nerve fibre of 

cord of above the nuclei of the cranial neuromuscular junction 
nerves i 

Tone Increased (spasticity) + clonus Reduced 

Muscle AI muscle groups of the lower limb - More distally than proximally. Both flexors and 
weakness more marked in the flexor muscles. Inthe extensors affected 

upper limb weakness ES 
the extensors 

Deep tendon Increased (but superficial reflexes such as Reduced or absent 
A reflexes abdominal reflexes are usually absent) 

1 Plantar Extensor (upgoing too) Normal or absent 
response 

9 Fasciculation Absent May be present in anterior horn cell lesions 

i Wasting Late; mainly because of disuse Usually present 

Motor examination 

In each step of neurological examination you have to know 

in each neurological examination hav know 

Items vou should examin rin motor ex ination 

“power 
1) State 
What you look for: 
» ‘*atrophy >> look for it at certain sites ... detect it by: inspection, 

palapation, measurement 

» *hypertrophy >> common at calf muscles in DMD, generalized in myotonia congenita 

» *fasciculations >> look for it at large muscles, elicit it by tapping. 

216 



CHAPTER lll: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Atrophy where to look for it 

2)Tone 
* Tone is the resistance appreciated when moving a limb passively 
What you look for 

no tone changes. 
Hypotonia: as in LMNL, cerebellar pathology 
hypertonia 

Spasticity (sign of pyramidal tract lesion) ... Clasp knife spasticity as in stroke 
Rigidity (sign of extra pyramidal system affection) ... cog wheel rigidity as in 

Parkinson disease. 

The distribution of these changes?? 

How do you examine for it? 

* Order the patient to totally relax 

217 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

* No active movement by the patient 
» Start from distal to proximal 
« Compare each side with the other one in each step 
« Perform ROM for each joint, thoroughly and slowly >>> feel for resistance to passive 

movement 

+ For example: flexion extension around wrist, elbow, ankle, knee .... Circumduction around 

hip .....etc 
» Some joints can be tested by more than one technique: like shaking of wrists, ankles in case 

of hypotonia .... Rolling of thighs against bed to detect hypotonia around hips 

How do you examine for it? 

Interpretation of your findings 

: 
r———— ———— 

} 

Motor power Examination 
« Test for: Motor strength and range of motion 
» Patients ability to move on command 
» |f unconscious = response to pain 

218 



CHAPTER Iii: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

» What | look for: weakness & its distribution 
* Scale from 0 (no movement) to +5 (full range of motion and full strength) 

Medical Research Council Scale for power grading 
5/5 = Full Strength 
4/5 = Weakness with Resistance 

* 3/5 = Can Overcome Gravity Only 
* 2/5 =Can Move Limb without Gravity 
* 1/5 = Can Activate Muscle without Moving Limb 
e (0/5 = Cannot Activate Muscle. 

How do | look for it ' 
* Ask the patient to follow your commands 
» Start distally and extend proximally b 

Compare each group of muscles with the opposite side 
» Explain the action to the patient and inform him you will apply resistance he should try to 

overcome 
* Fix the joint proximal to the action and instruct the patient not to move it 
* Allow for free range of movement before applying resistance 

Don’t forget trunk muscles 
* Record your findings. 

&® 

Howdollookforit 

Summary of motor supply to the upper limb Testing for muscle power 
== = a aa = 

A i | = Flexion L2/3 
Abduction N J ® Extension L5/IS1/2 
cs/8 Adduction ) Se EL won| # = Abduction LA/SISA 

Ph... \ Frattkn ic 7 i = Adduction ~~ L2/3/4 
foot : ver a oF. . ® Knee 
/ / ora LL Cie ~~ j= = Flexion L5/S1 

I 7 PTI Foxian kj = Extension L3/4 

ey C78 / | If pn «« ® Ankle 
(I= Flexion —F y nw = Plantar flexion S1/2 
Foro : Extension’, 1° c7/8 AN = Dorsifloxion L4 
~— ear 2 C7/8 oh LS = Eversion L5/S1 

TRAIT 7 ER ominnd Rade. Merman Canis, 10vereiy of Livre, 19% 17 PLIZE Cine Bhim Fw sousa Centre, Uns arly of Leorpont Lg F 

Interpret your findings 

» Pyramidal tract weakness: D>P, in UL: E>F, in LL: F>E 

» (Capsular lesions >>> contralateral hemiplegia 

* Brain stem unilateral lesions >>> crossed hemiparesis 

* In cervical cord lesions >>> pyramidal quadriparesis 

* |n dorsal cord lesions >>> pyramidal paraparesis 

* In polyneuropathy >>> distal flaccid weakness 

* In muscle disease >>> mostly P>D. 

219 



CHAPTER lll: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Interpret your findings 

A 

Weakness in 2D Possibly 
both lower — y 

mucclie dicease 
limbs 

D=P, E=Fin - Rt pyramidal 
Wi. FE intl tract lesion 

?Radianerve 

1 jury 

The important message 

» Do not forget to do all items of motor examination 

e in each item you have to know: WHAT you look for, HOW you elicit it, INTERPRETATION of 

it. 

Examination of reflexes 

220 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Types of reflexes 

Deep tendon reflexes Superficialreflexes | Pathological reflexes 

You need to know 

Interpretation of 
What you look for? How you elicit it al 

findings 

Motor System 
Deep Tendon Reflexes 

0 = absent Muscle Nerve Root 
+ = presentonly with 

reinforcement Biceps Musculocutaneous | C5, (C6) 

1+ = present bit Supinator | Radial C6, (C5) 
depressed Tr Radial c7 

He NSH) riceps adia 

3+ = increased Patellar Femoral L3-L4 

4+ = clonus Achilles Tibial S1-52 

221 



CHAPTER Iii: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Reflexes “symmetry” is tested 

0 absent even with reinforcement 

+ barely detectable 

ob normal amplitude and speed 

RE. large than normal amplitude (exaggerated) and speed (brisk) or spread 

of muscle contraction beyond the zone of muscles usually activated 

(radiating) 

. bot large than normal amplitude and speed with myoclonus 

How to elicit signs 

¢ Your hammer 

e Instruct the patient to relax 

Positioning 

Proper exposure 

« Distraction 

Reinforcement 

Ankia {(S1) reflex 

wrmney chris nha fare OD uk 

Interpretation of findings 

+ Hyper-reflexia in cases of UMNL (pyramidal tract lesions) 

« Hyporeflexia or lost DT) in cases of LMNL (e.g polyneuropathy) 

+ Focal loss of DT) may indicate focal root or nerve pathology (e.g. loss of triceps reflex in 

radial nerve injury). 

222 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Superficial reflexes 

Plantar response 
Abdominal Reflexes 

«Lightly but bnskly stroke 
each side of the 
abdomen, above (18, T9, 
T10) and below (710, 
T11, T12) the umbilicus. 
Note the contraction of 
the abdominal muscles 
and deviation of the 
umbilicus toward the 
stimulus. 

* WRIST CLONUS 

* Hoffman sign 
« Finger jerk 
« Wartenbusrign 

223 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Sensory examination 

Basic background 

Primary Sensory Modalities 

Reflect Input from sensory receptors, sensory nerves, spinal cord, brainstem, 
through to the level of the Thalamus. 
Pain / Temperature Sensation (Spinothalamic Tract) 
Vibration / Position Sensation (Posterior Columns) 
Touch (Multiple Pathways) 

Cortical Sensory Modalities 

Reflect Processing by the Somatosensory Cortex (post- central gyrus) 
Stereognosis 
Graphesthesia 
Two-Point Discrimination. 

Sensory pathways 

Pain and Temperature 

+ A-6 and small-unmyelinated fibres provide pain and temperature input which travels 

through the dorsal roots, then up and down a few segments in Lissauer’s tract then 

synapse with neurons in Substantia Gelatinosa) 

224 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Second-order neurons cross midline at the anterior commissure and travel up the 

lateral spinothalamic tract to synapse on VPL nucleus of Thalamus 

Joint Position and Vibration 

Larger myelinated A-a,p fibres bring sensory information up through the Fasiculus 

Gracilis (legs) and Fasiculus Cuneatus (arms)- posterior column- to synapse on the 

ipsilateral Nucleus Gracilis and Cuneatus respectively. 

* Second-order neurons cross at the medial lemniscus to synapse on VPL nucleus of the 

Thalamus 

Dorsal column system Spinothalamic tract 

Primary / 
EINOCY MTA ~~ 

Ventroposterolateral (VPL) z ; 
nucleuosf thalamus 3 i) 2k, Thalamus [J 3d order neurones 

oo) trigermnal a ot LN 

Meats | | 

\ cunéans 

Trigerminal : 
femmasiin I 

Rucleus 
: rachis 

Sensory Examination 

eo Assess the 2 modalities : 

e Spinothalamic >>> pain, temperature 

e Dorsal column-medial lemniscus >>> vibration, position sense (proprioception) 

¢ Evaluates ability to perceive sensations with eyes closed 

e Always start at reference point ( area with normal sensation as reference for 

comparison: midline in forehead for superficial sensation, clavicle for vibration sense) 

eo Explain to the patient carefully 

e The procedure step;s and areas examined will depend on pattern of sensory loss you 

examine for 

225 



CHAPTER III: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Patterns of sensory affection 

I 

Coy Cornpitotes Bsrinki  Srovere- Saou ares 
[= =] areal 40r oach wy MCE ey fred 

Periphnaeal rset Dap way Farad 
carpal Lurirsad Sy inal For FTEs Sf achaed sTry 

Tussle ove Carre bhead 
eased Bia ram I jus Ty 

Sensory Examination 

« Superficial sensation 
» Deep sensation 
* Cortical sensation 

l. Superficial sensation: Spinothalamic Tract: pain and Temperature 

* Pain Sensation 
Sharp safety pin or another tool (better to use toothpick) 
One for each patient 
+ Test by: 

Start with reference point 
Proceed as per sensory pattern examined for. 

Ask patient: Does this feel same as this? 
NB. Lightest pressure needed .... No need for extreme pressure 

Temperature Sensation 
Sensation of Cold (cold tuning fork), mostly skipped 

+ Light touch (light touch without localization) 
Wisp of cotton. 
Touch lightly - avoid pressure 
Ask patient: To respond when touch is felt 
Compare one area with another 

226 

LH 



CHAPTER ii: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

ll. Deep sensation: Posterior Columns. 
* Vibration Sensation: 

128 Hz Tuning Fork 

if impaired, proceed proximally 

(start from big toe hallux >> malleolus >> tibial tuberosity>> anterior iliac crest>> spinous 
processes) 

+ Joint Position Sensation and sense of movement: 

Check great toe, 

Grasp toe by sides - pull away from other toes 

Demonstrate “up” & “down” 

Romberg Sign: 

Ask the patient to stand then close his eyes while you are behind him to avoid fall 

Cortical Sensation: 

Discriminative Sensations 
* Stereognosis, graphesthesia, two-point discrimination 
» Test ability of sensory cortex to correlate, analyze, & interpret sensations 

Dependent on touch & position sense 
-Screen first with stereognosis - proceed to other methods if indicated 

Stereognosis 

* Ability to identify an object by feeling it 

» Place familiar object in patient's hand & ask patient to identify it 

» Normally patient manipulates it skillfully & identifies it correctly 

227 



CHAPTER lll: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Graphesthesia 
e Perform if inability to manipulate object. 

e Ability to identify numbers written in hand. 

e Use patient’s orientation. 

Two-Point Discrimination 

eo Touch two places simultaneously. 

e Alternate stimuli 

eo Avoid pain 

e Determine distance 

Tactile Localization 

e Have pt close eyes 

e TouchptonR cheek &L arm 

e Ask patient where touch was felt 

WHAT YOU FIND 

Patterns of sensory loss 
Sensory deficits can be classified into levels of the nervous 
system: 

1. Single nerve 
Root or roots 
Peripheral nerve 
Spinal cord 
Brainstem 
Thalamic sensory loss 

Sensory 0ss assoclated with 
spinal cord lesions: 

Complete transverse lesion 

“Hemissction ofthe cord 
~=Centralcord lesion 

228 

othBa  wD 



CHAPTER li: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Sensory levels at spinal cord 

Glove and stocking 
loss 

Dermatompal patterns 
= i — Er —————— a 

229 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

The important message for sensory examination 

e Examine for superficial (pin prick test) and deep (vibration, sense of position and 

movement) sensory modalities 

e Start with reference point ... or compare affected to non affected sites 

e look for specific pattern of sensory loss. 

Approach to Motor localization 

1. Introduction: 

In neurology , history and examination are the way to provisional diagnosis 

Based on 2 simple concepts 

Where is the lesion in the nervous system 

What is the lesion in the nervous system 

2. Anatomy of The motor system: 
ramidal tract {cortico spinal pathway UMN 

eo UMN starts in the Betz cells in the frontal motor cortex , then descends down the 

Corona radiata to the posterior limb of the internal capsule down to the brain stem, 

where the motor decussation takes place in the medulla 

The motor tract then descends in the spinal cord till it ends at the Anterior horn cells 

AHC. 

e LMN : From AHC, motor root exite the spinal cord , then nerve , Neuromuscular 

junction and finally the muscles . 

230 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

Fei, 
4 

Spinal cord segment 

B) extrapyramidal pathway : (Basal ganglia) which contributes to the muscle tone and 

reflexes. 

Table: Difference between Upper motor neuron Lesion and lower motor neuron lesion: 

RiY i a 

UMNL i LMNL 

Lesion Above the anterior horn cell in the spinal Anterior horn cel, motor nerve fibre or 
cord or above the nuclei of the cranial neuromuscular junction 
nerves 

Tone Increased (spasticity) + clonus Reduced 

Muscle All muscle groups of the lower limb — More distally than proximally. Both fiexors and 
weakness more marked in the flexor muscles. Inthe extensors affected 

upper limb weakness is more marked in 
the extensors 

Deep tendon Increased {but superficial reflexes such as Reduced or absent 
reflexes abdominal reflexes are usually absent) 

Plantar Extensor (upgoing toe) Normal or absent 
response 

Fasciculation Absent May be present in anterior horn cell lesions 

Wasting Late; mainly because of disuse Usually present 

231 



CHAPTER Ili: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

4.Motor examination 

A) Muscle state :is there atrophy , hypertrophy or fasiculations ? 
B) Muscle Tone : is there hypertonia (spasticity/ rigidity) , normotonia or 

hypotonia ? 

C) Muscle power 
Degree of weakness ? 
Distribution of weakness ? 

5.Localization 

a) Weakness due to cortical pyramidal lesions 

e¢ Contralateral monoplegia. 

e Associated cortical manifestations as seizures, dysphasia, apraxia, or cortical sensory 

deficit 
b) Weakness due to subcortical pyramidal lesions: 

e Contralateral weakness (hemiplegia) of pyramidal distribution not equally affecting 

upper and lower limbs (fibers are dispersed to reach different destinations). 

e Contralateral partial hemi-hypoesthesia and quadri-anopia could be present. 

c) Weakness due to capsular pyramidal lesions 

e Contralateral dense hemiplegia (sever and equally affecting upper and lower limbs) 

weakness (closely impact fibers) of pyramidal distribution, associated with 

hypertonia. 

e Contralateral hemi-hypoesthesia and hemianopia could be present 

d) Weakness due to brain stem pyramidal lesions 
» Contralateral (above decussation at the lower medulla) weakness of pyramidal 

distribution, associated with hypertonia. No involuntary movements, and no 

incoordination are evident. 
Ipsilateral cranial nerve palsy (CROSSED deficit is the hallmark). 

+ Weakness could be bilateral especially in intra-medullary lesions resulting in sphincter 

impairment (usually precipitancy ). 
« There could be also, other long tracts deficit, dissociated ophthalmoplegia, conjugate 

eye movement palsy and vertigo. 

e) Weakness due to spinal cord pyramidal tract lesions 

« Below the level (LEVEL is the hallmark) of the lesion there is weakness of pyramidal 
distribution, associated with hypertonia on the same lesion side. No involuntary 

movements, and no incoordination are evident. 

« Weakness is early bilateral (Paraplegia) especially in intra-medullary lesions resulting 
in early sphincter impairment (incontinence at the conus, retention at dorsal levels 

and precipitancy at cervical levels). 
» There could be also, deep sensory level on the lesion side, and superficial sensory 

level on the contralateral side. 

232 



CHAPTER Ill: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

At the level radical manifestation may be evident. 

f) Weakness due to AHC lesion : 

Focal AHC affection will cause segmental weakness, atrophy and fasciculation 

without segmental sensory affection. But spinal cord affection may be evident {long 

tract deficits below level and sphincter impairment). 

Systemic AHC affection (Motor Neuron Disease) causes bilateral and symmetrical, 

weakness, atrophy and fasciculation. This is usually associated with tongue 

fasciculation, hyper-reflexia (tonic atrophy), intact sensations, sphincters and 

abdominal reflexes. 

g) Weakness due to radicular (roots) diseases 

Systemic radiculopathy like in Guillen-Barre syndrome weakness is bilateral and 

symmetrical, more proximal (less root value), associated with hypotonia, atrophy, no 

involuntary movements, but sensory incoordination may be present. 

Associated with dermatomal sensory deficits and radicular pains, but no autonomic 

deficits (autonomic fibers join peripheral nerves directly). 

h) Weakness due to peripheral nerve diseases 

In peripheral neuropathy (hereditary and metabolic) weakness is bilateral and 

symmetrical, more distal (long nerves more vulnerable), associated with hypotonia, 

early atrophy (no nerve growth factor). No involuntary movements, but sensory 

incoordination may be present. 

Associated with impairment of superficial sensation (glove and stocking 

hypoesthesia), deep sensation and autonomic functions (sphincters and postural 

hypotension). 

N.B. on examination there is early hyo-reflexia. 

Weakness due to neuromuscular diseases 

Characterized by diurnal variation (significant fatigability) and specific marsh. 

In primary MG cranial weakness first and in secondary myasthenia skeletal weakness 

first. 

No constant weakness early in the disease, no change of tone and muscle state, no 

involuntary movements, and no incoordination. 

No symptoms of other system affection 

Weakness due to muscular diseases 

Hereditary and metabolic muscular diseases cause bilateral, almost symmetrical 

weakness, more proximal (bulky muscles). 

Associated with hypotonia, late atrophy {bulky), no abnormal involuntary movements 

and no incoordination. 

233 



CHAPTER lil: THE MOTOR SYSTEM, SPINAL CORD 

* No other non-motoric symptoms. 

Summary : 

e Pyramidal tract weakness: D>P, in UL: E>F, in LL: F>E 

e Capsular lesions >>> contralateral hemiplegia 

e Brain stem unilateral lesions >>> crossed hemiparesis 

e In cervical cord lesions >>> pyramidal quadriparesis 

e In dorsal cord lesions >>> pyramidal paraparesis 

e In polyneuropathy >>> distal flaccid weakness 

e In muscle disease >>> mostly P>D 

234 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Chapter — IV 

BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, 
TEMPORAL REGION AND 
PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

235 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

CHAPTER IV: BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL 
REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs): 

By the end of this chapter the student should be able to: 

o Describe ventral and dorsal surfaces of brain stem. 
e Describe boundaries and contents of interpeduncuiar fossa. 
e Describe the shape, walls, boundaries and communications of the fourth 

ventricle. 
e Define reticular formation. 
e Describe histological sections of the medulla oblongata, pons and midbrain at 

different levels. 
e Describe connections of different nuclei in the brain stem 

Describe the origin and pathway of cranial nerves present at different levels 
within the brain stem 

eo List components of medial longitudinal bundle. 

e locate attachment of cranial nerves to brain stem and specify function and 

distribution of each cranial nerve. 

e Discuss the distribution of individual cranial nerve within the different functional 

columns in the brain stem. 

o Identify arteries supplying different parts of the brain stem and their clinical 

significance. 
e Describe detailed anatomy of cranial cavity; dural folds and sinuses, emissary and 

diploic veins and middle meningeal artery with their clinical significance. 

o Describe the intracranial course of cranial nerves and internal carotid artery. 

e Identify the site, type, shape and cells of trigeminal ganglion. 

o Identify boundaries and contents of temporal, infratemporal and pterygopalatine 

fossae. 

e Describe the anatomy of temporomandibular joint. 

e Describe attachment, action and nerve supply of muscles of mastication. 

e Discuss the anatomy of maxillary nerve, mandibular nerve, maxillary artery and 

pterygoid venous plexus. 

eo Discuss site, roots and branches of parasympathetic ganglia of the head and neck. 

236 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

BRAIN STEM EXTERNAL FEATURES 

- The brain stem is formed of midbrain, pons, and medulla oblongata. It connects the cerebrum 
with the spinal cord. It is connected to the cerebellum by 3 peduncles: superior cerebellar 
peduncle (SCP), middle cerebellar peduncle (MCP), and inferior cerebellar peduncle (ICP} which 
connect the midbrain, pons & medulla respectively to the cerebellum. 

- The brain stem contains: 
1. White matter which includes: 

e Longitudinal fibers: 
- Descending tracts: pyramidal, extrapyramidal & corticopontine. 
- Ascending tracts in the form of lemnisci. 
- Association tract called medial longitudinal bundle (MLB) 

e Horizontal fibers: 
-  Decussations (e.g., motor & sensory decussations in medulla) 
-  Arcuate fibers in the medulla 

2. Grey matter which forms scattered nuclei that include. 
e Cranial nerve nuclei. 
e Qther nuclei: as the olivary nuclei in the medulla, the pontine nuclei in the pons and 

the red nucleus in the midbrain 
3. Reticular formation: a core of mixed grey and white matters lying within the brain stem. 

EXTERNAL FEATURES 
VENTRAL surface 
From below upwards, it shows (Fig. 4.1): 

1) THE MEDULLA OBLONGATA 
e Extends between spinal cord (below) & 

pons {above). 
¢ Shows 3 elevations on each side of anterior 
median fissure; from medial to lateral 
1. Pyramid: made by the corticospinal tract, 
which forms the motor decussation in 
the lower medulla. 

2. Olive: made by the inferior olivary 
nucleus. 

3. Inferior cerebellar peduncle (ICP) made 
by fibers connecting the medulla & 
cerebellum. 

e Shows attachments of the last 4 cranial 
nerves: 
- Xi to the anterolateral sulcus (between 

the pyramid & olive) Fig. 4.1: ventral surface of brain stem 

237 

- 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

- IX, X, Xl, from above downwards, to the posterolateral sulcus (between the olive & ICP), 

2) THE PONS . 
e A bridge, one inch long, connecting the right & left cerebellar hemispheres by a middle 

cerebellar peduncle (MCP) on each side. 
e |t extends between the medulla oblongata (below) & midbrain (above). 
e In the middle, the basis pontis projects anteriorly & shows: 

- Sulcus for the basilar artery in the midline. 
- Transverse grooves between bundles of transverse pontine fibers. 

¢ Gives attachment to middle 4 cranial nerves: 
- V. (trigeminal) to the junction of MCP & basis pontis, closer to upper border by 2 roots 
(sensory: large, lat. & motor: small, med.). 

- VI. (abducent) to lower border of pons just above pyramid. 
- Vil (facial) to cerebello-pontine angle (bet. MCP & ICP) by 2 roots (motor: large med. & 
sensory nervus intermedius: small lat.). 

- VII (vestibulo-cochlear) to cerebello-pontine angle, lateral to Vii, by 2 roots (vestibular 
medially & cochlear laterally). 

Clinically, cerebellopontine angle tumor causes lesion of Vil => facial paralysis + lesion of Vii 
—> deafness & vertigo. 

3) THE MIDBRAIN 
e Appears as2 diverging cerebral peduncles enclosing the interpeduncular fossa. 
¢ The oculomotor nerve emerges from the medial side of the cerebral peduncle. 
e 4 structures are seen to wind around cerebral peduncle: 

1. Optic tract 2. Trochlear nerve 
3. Posterior cerebral artery 4. Basal vein 

THE INTERPEDUNCULAR FOSSA: (Fig. 4.2) is a trapezoid depression between the 2 cerebral 
peduncles. It does not belong to the midbrain 
but to the hypothalamus. -_ 0 \ ~ /, Infundibulum 
Boundarie: s: OOppttiicc  cthraicats ma I i Tuber cinerenm 

1. Anteriorly: optic chiasma. Er Td nmillary body 
2. Anterolaterally: optic tract. Cerebral + gi rm AR 59% Berfarates 
3. Posterolaterally: cerebral peduncle. peduncle 2X. NG wn 
4. Posteriorly: upper border of pons. TF I ~~ 

Contents: SN Pons 
1. Tuber cinereum: convex mass of grey 

Fig. 4.2: interpeduncular fossa 
matter (= the median eminence of 
hypothalamus). The infundibulum (or pituitary 
stalk) connects it with the posterior lobe of pituitary gland. 

2. Mammillary bodies: two rounded nuclei of hypothalamus. 

238



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

3. Posterior perforated substance: an area of grey matter showing small holes pierced by 
the central branches of posterior cerebral artery. 

4. Oculomotor nerve emerges from the medial surface of the cerebral peduncle. 

N.B: an anterior perforated substance is situated lateral to the optic chiasma & is pierced by 
the central branches of anterior & middle cerebral arteries. 

DORSAL surface OF BRAIN STEM 
From below upwards, it shows: (Fig. 4.3) 

1) BACK OF MEDULLA OBLONGATA 

e Its lower part or closed medulla 

shows 3 elevations on each side of sop. SLGB 
posterior median sulcus: a | 7/ - 
1. Gracile fasciculus (tract) wmc ole| } Solo pF Erebealaquedsiel 

ending in gracile tubercle Pony ret = Locus ceruleus 
(nucleus). JAIL A LS Med. eminence 

2. Cuneate fasciculus ending in PONS | A= 2limitans 
cuneate tubercle. BN Facial colliculus 

3. ICP. Vv | ‘estibular ares 

AOA VestibulaAr 
e Its upper part or open Medulla 

AT | \ ; . Hypoglossal A 
forms the lower part of the floor of 10 XN Vagal a 
4th ventricle, it is triangular in | I N "wi 
shape; having 

lion Central canal 
- Base (above) separated from - 
pons by medullary stria Fig. 4.3: dorsal surface of brain stem 

- Apex (below) continuous with central canal. 
- Floor: On each side of the median sulcus lies an inverted V-shaped depression, the 
inferior fovea, separating three elevated triangles (trigones): 
1. Hypoglossal Trigone: overlies hypoglossal nucleus. It lies medial to the fovea. 
2. Vagal Trigone: overlies dorsal vagal nucleus and lies between the two limbs of the 

inferior fovea. 
3. Vestibular Trigone: overlies vestibular nuclei and lies lateral to the fovea. 
The lower part of inferior fovea presents the area postrema (chemoreceptor trigger 
zone) which contains vomiting center. 

2) BACK OF PONS 
Forms the upper part of floor of 4" ventricle. It is triangular, having 
- Base (below): made by medullary stria. 
- Apex (above): continuous with cerebral aqueduct of Sylvius. 
- floor: Shows a medial eminence on each side of the median sulcus; the medial 
eminence overlies the abducent nucleus. The lower part of median eminence is 
expanded to form the facial colliculus. The latter is produced by the motor fibers 
of the facial nerve looping over the abducent nucleus. Lateral to the medial 

239 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

eminence is the sulcus limitans whose upper part shows a bluish area called locus 

ceruleus which is rich in norepinephrine while its lower part forms the superior 

fovea. The vestibular area lies lateral to the superior fovea &overlies some 

vestibular nuclei. 
3) BACK OF Midbrain 

- Shows 4 colliculi (corpora quadrigemina): 2 sup. & 2 inf. 

. Each colliculus has a brachium 
- The brachium of sup. colliculus passes to lat. geniculate body (LGB). 

- The brachium of inf. colliculus passes to med. geniculate body (MGB). 

FOURTH VENTRICLE & RETICULAR FORMATION 

FOURTH VENTRICLE 

It is the cavity of the Rhombencephalon (Hind ~ §"ventricle 
brain). 
It lies between cerebellum (posteriorly) and brain 3 = 

stem (anteriorly). | > ABs B Sen. medellagy 
It communicates with the third ventricle via rg; be 
cerebral aqueduct of Sylvius and with central canal 

of medulla oblongata inferiorly. It also 

communicates with the subarachnoid space via 3 

foramina: one median & two lateral. In sagittal 

section, it appears triangular in shape (Fig. 4.4). 

Roof: (Fig. 4.5) 
o Superiorly: Superior Cerebellar Peduncles 

(SCPs) and Superior Medullary Velum (layer of 
ependyma). 

e Inferiorly: Inferior Medullary Velum (layer of 

ependyma) covered by pia mater forming 
choroid plexus of fourth ventricle. 
This part of roof has a large median foramen 

“foramen of Magendie” which connects the 
interior of the ventricle with the subarachnoid 
space. 

Floor: (Rhomboid fossa) It is formed by the dorsal 
surface of pons & upper part of medulla. It 
is divided by the medullary stria into a 
superior pontine part and an inferior 
medullary part 

e Pontine part 
Shows a medial eminence on each side of Fig. 4.5: roof of 4'" ventricle 

240



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

the median sulcus. The lower part of median eminence is expanded to form the facial 
colliculus. The latter is produced by the motor fibers of the facial nerve looping over the 
abducent nucleus. Lateral to the medial eminence is the sulcus limitans whose upper part 
shows a bluish area called locus ceruleus which is rich in norepinephrine while its lower 
part forms the superior fovea. The vestibular area lies lateral to the superior fovea & 
overlies some vestibular nuclei. 

e Medullary part: 
On each side of the median sulcus lies an inverted V-shaped depression, the inferior 
fovea, separating three elevated triangles (trigones): 

1. Hypoglossal Trigone: overlies hypoglossal nucleus. It lies medial to the fovea. 
2. Vagal Trigone: overlies dorsal vagal nucleus and lies between the two limbs of the 

inferior fovea. 
3. Vestibular Trigone: overlies vestibular nuclei and lies lateral to the fovea. 
The lower part of inferior fovea presents the area postrema {chemoreceptor trigger zone) 
which contains vomiting center. 

Lateral Boundaries: 

e Superiorly.....Superior Cerebellar Peduncles 
e Inferiorly .....Inferior Cerebellar Peduncles + Gracile & Cuneate Tubercles 
e Lateral Recess:A  recess from the cavity of fourth ventricle extends laterally over the 

surface of ICP. The lateral recess opens on each side into the subarachnoid space by a 
lateral aperture (Foramen of Luschka). 

The choroid plexus of the fourth ventricle lies at lower part of roof of fourth ventricle. 

RETICULAR FORMATION 

It consists of nerve cells and nerve fibers scattered within the brain stem extending superiorly to 
hypothalamus & thalamus and inferiorly to spinal cord. 
Its neurons are arranged into 3 columns: median, medial & lateral (Fig. 4.6.). 

Lateral 

Fig. 4.6: reticular formation 

241 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

INTERNAL STRUCTURE OF BRAIN STEM 
1. THE MEDULLA OBLONGATA 

The medulla represents a conical, expanded continuation of the upper cervical spinal cord. 

e The medulla oblongata is formed of two parts: 

I. Closed medulla: It is the caudal part, where the central canal is still found. it has two 

levels: 

a) Level of motor decussation, the lowermost part. 

b) Level of sensory decussation, rostral to the motor decussation. 

i. Open medulla: It is the rostral part where the central canal is replaced by the fourth 

ventricle which is found dorsally. 

Internal features of the medulla: 

1) Pyramidal decussation (decussation of corticospinal tract). 

2) Sensory decussation (decussation of internal arcuate fibers to form the medial lemniscus). 

3) The spinal nucleus of trigeminal nerve replaces Substantia Gelatinosa of the spinal cord. 

4) The descending fibers of spinal trigeminal tract replaces Lissaure’s tract of spinal cord. 

5) Ascending and descending tracts 

6) The appearance of the fourth ventricle, representing the rostral continuation of the central 

canal of the spinal cord. 

7) The reticular formation forms the core of the medulla. 

8) Nuclei in medulla (cranial nerve nuclei and cerebellar relay nuclei). 

> The Corticospinal (pyramidal or Motor) Decussation (Fig. 4.7a): 

e Most of the fibers of Gradle nudeus 

corticospinal tract (90%) cross 

as a large bundle anterior to 

central gray. The crossed fibers 

descend in the dorsal part of 

lateral funiculus forming the 

lateral corticospinal tract. 

e About 8% of the fibers descend 

without crossing, forming the 

anterior corticospinal tract. 

These fibers gradually cross 

through their descent in the 

spinal cord. 
Pyramid 

Fig. 4.7a: Level of Motor decussation of closed Medulla 

242 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

eo About 2% of the fibers descend in the anterolateral funiculus forming the uncrossed 

anterolateral corticospinal tract. 

Function of motor decussation: 

It forms the basis for voluntary motor control of one half of the body by the opposite cerebral 
cortex. 

> The Sensory decussation: (Fig. 4.7 b) 

e The gracile and cuneate nuclei appear in the dorsal aspect of the medulla. Their tracts are 

found posterior to the nuclei. 

e At the level of the sensory decussation, the nuclei appear bigger because the gracile and ; 

cuneate tracts end gradually into them. 

e Course: Myelinated fibers from the gracile and cuneate nuclei sweep anteromedially around 

the central gray, forming the internal arcuate fibers. They decussate to the opposite side and 
ascend upwards forming the medial lemniscus. 

¢ The medial lemniscus is a compact bundle parallel and adjacent to the median raphe. 

e Lamination of fibers: The fibers from the gracile nucleus (Sacral, lumber and lower thoracic) 

are anterior in position, while the fibers from cuneate nucleus {upper thoracic and cervical) 

are posterior in position. 

Termination: The fibers project to the ventral posterolateral nucleus (VPLN) of thalamus. 

Gracile nucleus 
andtract Accessory 

cuneaie nucleus 
Cunede nucleus 

and tract 

Spinal 
nucleus of 
trigeminal 
and tract 

Sensory 

cused Medial 
Sit lemniscu 

Dr. Soke: uate nucleus 

Fig. 4.7b: Sensory decussation of the closed Medulla 

243 

= Le — ——— ——— 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

> Spinal nucleus and tract of Trigeminal nerve: 

Site of the nucleus: It is located medial to the spinal tract of trigeminal, extending from 

the trigeminal root at the pons to the second cervical segment. 

Connection: 

Afferent: fibers from spinal trigeminal tract that enter the pons from the trigeminal 

ganglion. These fibers descend in the dorsolateral part in the lower pons and medulla to 

reach the second cervical segment to terminate on the cells of the spinal nucleus of V. 

These fibers carry general somatic sensation (pain and temperature) from the face, 

forehead and mucous membranes of nose and mouth. 

Efferent: Secondary trigeminal fibers are the axons of cells of spinal trigeminal nucleus. 

They cross to the opposite side. They ascend upwards to the thalamus forming the 

trigeminothalamic fibers (Trigeminal lemniscus), which is found close to the medial 

lemniscus. The trigeminothalamic fibers end in the ventral postero-medial nucleus (VPMN) 

of thalamus and then to cerebral cortex. 

» Ascending and Descending Tracts in medulla: 

1) Medial lemniscus. 

2) Spinothalamic tracts. 

3) Dorsal spinocerebellar tract merges into ICP. 

4) Ventral spinocerebellar tract lies in the retro-olivary area. 

5) MLF is anterior to XII nucleus, adjacent to median raphe. 

6) Spinal tract of V lies in the posterolateral part. 

> The Reticular Formation 

Definition: It represents a large collection of neurons of various sizes and shapes in a network of 

fibers extending from the level of the motor decussation of the medulla to the upper part of 

the midbrain. it is the upward continuation of the gray matter of the spinal cord. 

; Connections: 

Afferent: from Efferent: 

e Spinal cord. Ascending fibers: to thalamus in the central tegmental tract. 

e Cerebral cortex. Descending fibers: to spinal cord through medullary and pontine 

| Deep cerebellar nuclei. reticulospinal tracts). 

The reticular formation controls: 

1) The activity of muscles through reticulospinal tracts. 

2) Somatic and visceral sensations. 

3) Autonomic and endocrine nervous systems. 

4) Arousal and the level of consciousness. So, pathological lesion of reticular formation in 

human can result in loss of consciousness and even coma. 

244 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

» Nuclei in the medulla are: {fig 4.8) 

1) Lower four cranial nerve nuclei Xli, XI, X and IX. 

2) The medulla contains many cerebellar relay nuclei: 

a. Accessory cuneate nucleus. 

b. Arcuate nucleus. 

c. Nuclei of reticular formation. 

d. Olivary nuclear complex. 

® Accessory cuneate nucleus: 

Site: lateral to the cuneate nucleus at rostrai levels. 

Connections: it receives fibers from the cervical and thoracic spinal ganglia. It gives 

uncrossed fibers to the cerebellum (cuneo-cerebellar fibers or the dorsal external arcuate 

fibers), that pass in the ICP. 

Function: It is equivalent to the Clarke’s nucleus. It carries unconscious proprioceptive 

sensation from the upper limbs and neck. 

® Arcuate nucleus: 

It lies on the anterior aspect of the pyramid. It represents the caudally displaced pontine 

nuclei. 

Connections: It receives afferent fibers from the cerebral cortex. it gives efferent fibers to 

the cerebellum through ICP (anterior external arcuate fibers). 

The Open Medulla (most rostral part of the medulla) is characterized by (Fig. 4.8): 

e Appearance of the fourth ventricle 

¢ The floor of the ventricle contains: 

1) Hypoglossal nucleus forms the most medial elevation in the floor of fourth ventricle 

(Hypoglossal trigone). 

2) Dorsal motor nucleus of vagus and solitary nucleus form the intermediate elevation 
(Vagal trigone). 

3) Medial and inferior vestibular nuclei form the lateral elevation 

e Appearance of inferior cerebellar peduncle. 

e Appearance of the main inferior olivary nucleus. 

245 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Dorsal nucleus of vagus 

Hypoglossal nerve 

Fig. 4.8: Open Medulla 

Cranial nerves 

They are 12 pairs of cranial nerves. They are distributed in the head and neck except the vagus 

nerves which supply also structures in thorax and abdomen. They are either pure motor or mixed 

nerves. 

Motor nuclei of the cranial nerves are controlled by impulses from the precentral and postcentral 

gyri of the cerebral cortex via corticonuclear (corticobulbar) tracts. Bilateral connection is 

present for all motor nuclei of the cranial nerves except part of the facial nucleus supplying the 

lower part of the face and the part of hypoglossal nucleus that supplies genioglossus muscle. 

Cranial Nerves that originate from medulla oblongata (Fig. 4.9): 

Hypoglossal nerve (XII) 

v' The hypoglossal nucleus lies deep to the hypoglossal trigone in the floor of 4th ventricle. 

It extends down to the closed medulla. 

v ltis a motor nerve. It supplies all muscles of tongue except the palatoglossus muscle. 

Connections of the nucleus: afferent fibers from: 

eo Bilateral corticonuclear fibers, except the part which innervates genioglossus muscles 

which is responsible for protrusion of the tongue (receives supply from the opposite side 

only). 

e Reticular formation 

246 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

e Accessory nerve {Xi} 
Edinpar-Wesipha 

nucleus 

Origin: it has two parts, cranial and spinal parts. pri eS Ocugomntos 
nucleus 

a) The spinal part of accessory nerve gi Writs 
. -— Motor nucious {CN V) 

e The fibers originate from the accessory — oe ms 

nucleus at the anterior horn cells of the (~ 2) / 
upper five cervical segments up to the motor |e enn A 

decussation of the medulla. | 7 sista sian 

e It supplies sternomastoid and the trapezius | simon N Facial nucleus 

muscles. I eval \ 
b) The cranial part: Hyposkorsa ? 

It arises from lower part of nucleus ambiguous supplies Nucioas of | iil 
muscles of palate (except tensor palate), muscles of 

pharynx (except stylopharyngeus) & muscles of larynx. sped ccasiry 

Vagus nerve (X) \ 

It is a mixed nerve containing both afferent and Fig. 4.9 Cranial nerve nuclei in the brain stem 

efferent fibers. 

Nuclei of the vagus nerve: 

a) Dorsal motor nucleus of the vagus: 
- {tis the largest parasympathetic nucleus in the brainstem. 

- It gives parasympathetic fibers to cardiac muscle and smooth muscles of the viscera 

of the thorax and abdomen. 

b) Nucleus ambiguus: 

- It is a motor nucleus, situated deep in the medullary reticular formation, between 
the spinal nucleus of trigeminal and the inferior olivary complex. 

- The Caudal part gives motor fibers to vagus nerve. Its fibers supply pharyngeal and 

intrinsic laryngeal muscles and the striated muscles of the palate and upper 

esophagus. 

c) Solitary nucleus (Nucleus solitarius): 

- It lies ventrolateral to the dorsal nucleus of vagus. 

- |t extends through the whole length of the medulla. 

- It receives visceral impulses from the tongue, epiglottis, general visceral sensations 

from organs supplied by vagus nerves. 

- |t projects to the sensory thalamus and then to the cerebral cortex. 

d) Spinal nucleus of trigeminal nerve: 
It carries exteroceptive sensation from the cutaneous area at the back of the ear and the 

external auditory meatus. 

247 

©) 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Glossopharyngeal nerve (IX): It is a mixed nerve. 
Nuclei of the glossopharyngeal nerve: 

a) Inferior salivatory nucleus: 

It gives parasympathetic fibers of glossopharyngeal nerve to relay in the Otic ganglion then 

give secretory fibers to parotid gland. 

b) Nucleus ambiguous: 
Its rostral part gives motor fibers of glossopharyngeal nerve that supply stylopharyngeus 

muscle. 

c) Solitary nucleus: It receives afferent fibers of glossopharyngeal nerve that carry: 

Sensory impulses from the mucous membranes of the posterior 1/3 of tongue, tonsils, pharynx 

(posterior wall) and Eustachian tube. 

d) Spinal nucleus of trigeminal nerve It receives fibers of IX nerve carrying general sensation 

from the oropharynx, posterior 1/3 of tongue, tonsils, auditory tube & middle ear 

Inferior Olivary complex 

It is a convoluted mass of gray matter, formed of: (Fig. 4.8) 

1. Principal inferior olivary nucleus: it appears as a folded bag with a hilum directed 

medially. 

2. Medial accessory nucleus: it lies lateral to the medial lemniscus. 

3. Dorsal accessory nucleus: it lies dorsal to the principal nucleus. 

Connections: 

I) Afferent: 

1. Descending fibers from the cerebral cortex end bilaterally on the principal nucleus. 

2. Rubro-olivary fibers: the fibers from the red nucleus end in the principal nucleus. 

3. 'Brain stem nuclei: The vestibular nuclei (medial and inferior) and Spinal nucleus of V. 

4. Ascending fibers from the spinal cord, mainly to accessory nuclei. 

I) Efferent: 

Olivo- cerebellar fibers to the contralateral cerebellum. The fibers pass in ICP and end as 

climbing fibers in cerebellar cortex. They have powerful excitatory action on Purkinje cells. 

They are responsible for motor learning. 

248 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Inferior cerebellar peduncle (ICP) (Fig. 4.10): 
It connects the cerebellum with the medulla It is formed mostly of afferent fibers. 

Content: 

Afferent Fibers: Inferior ovary infenor cerebellar 
nucleus peduncle 

1. Dorsal Spinocerebellar tract (from ipsilateral arolvo- 
cerebellar 

Clarke's nucleus). fibres 

2. Dorsal and ventral external arcuate fibers. 
} Olvocerebellar 

ut fibres 

3. Olivo-cerebellar fibers {from the inferior olivary 
Vesubulo- 

nucleus). cerebellar 

\ fibres 

} Antenor external 
4. Para-olivo-cerebellar fibers (from dorsal and Accessory 

oli 4 arcuate fibres 

medial accessory olivary nuclei). 
Postenor external 
arcuate fibres 

5. Vestibulo-cerebellar fibers {from the vestibular oN Vp (cuneocerebellar fibres) 

a | Accessory 
nuclei & vestibular ganglion). ab cuneate nucleus 

6. Reticulo-cerebellar fibers {from the reticular Postenor 

formation). spinocerebellar 
fibres 

Efferent Fibers: Postenor 
spinocerebellar 
tract 

To vestibular nuclei, reticular formation and olivary 

nuclei 
Fig. 4.10: Inferior Cerebellar Peduncle 

Function of the medulla: 

1. [t contains many cranial nerve nuclei that are concerned with vital functions (regulation of 

heart rate and respiration). 
2. It conducts the ascending and descending tracts connecting spinal cord to the higher centers. 

249 

———————— A p——— — Ga LEE 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

INTERNAL STRCTURE OF THE PONS 

The pons is formed of two parts (Fig. 4.11): 

I- Basis pontis, the ventral portion. 

Il- Tegmentum pontis, the dorsal portion. 

I. Ventral portion (Basis Pontis) 

Structure: It is formed of pontine nuclei as well as Longitudinal and transverse fibers 

1) Longitudinal fibers: these include the following: 

a) Corticospinal fibers: They form the largest bundles which are separated by 

transverse pontine fibers. 

b) Corticonuclear fibers: which end directly on the motor cranial nerve nuclei. 

c) Corticopontine fibers: 

They originate from frontal, parietal, temporal and occipital cortex. Fibers descend 

without crossing. They are called fronto-pontine, parieto-pontine, tempro-pontine and 

occipito-pontine and they terminate in pontine nuclei. 

2) Transverse pontine fibers: 

These are the axons of pontine nuclei which cross the opposite side forming the 

middle cerebellar peduncle (MCP). 

3) Pontine nuclei: these are closely packed cellular aggregates that are found between 

the corticopontine and corticospinal fibers. 

» The basis pontis is considered as a massive relay station, by which impulses from the 

cerebral cortex are transmitted to the contralateral cerebellar hemisphere. 

250 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

¢ 

rin of Tegmentum 

Rie pontis 

4 
4 

Faclal nerve 

Basis pontis \ 

v 

Poptine nuclei 

Transverse pontine fibers 

Fig. 4.11: Pons level of facial colliculus 

Middle Cerebellar Peduncle 
It is the largest peduncle. lt connects the cerebellum with the pons. It contains cortico-ponto- 

cerebellar fibers (transverse pontine fibers). 

Il. Dorsal portion (Tegmentum Pontis) 
The tegmentum pontis is an upward continuation of the medulla. 

Contents: 

1) Ascending and descending tracts. 

2) Cranial nerve nuclei Vil, VII, Vl and V. 

3) Reticular formation. 

> Tracts present in tegmentum pontis: (Fig. 4.11, 4.13) 

These are as in the medulla with few differences in orientation. 

The Medial Lemniscus lies horizontally dorsal to the basis pontis. 

The Medial Longitudinal Fasciculus (MLF) lies close to middle line. 

The spinothalamic and anterior spinocerebellar tracts. 

The spinal tract and nucleus of V are ventromedial to ICP. 

Central tegmental tract: It is a bundle lateral to the MLF, that contains: 

a) Descending fibers from the red nucleus in midbrain to the inferior olivary complex. 

b) Ascending fibers from the reticular formation to thalamic nuclei. 

251 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Cranial nerves that originate from pons 

The Vestibulo-cochlear nerve (Vii) ; 
Corti idiory 

It comprises two divisions: cochlear nerve and vestibular ple 

nerve. Auditory cortes 

Cochlear nuclei (ventral and dorsal) can be seen at li gerd 
nucleus 

tegmentum pontis at the level of facial colliculus at the 
Inferior colliculus 

dorsolateral aspect ventral and dorsal to ICP (Fig. 4.11). 

Vestibular nuclei are 4 nuclei: discussed later (Fig. 4.12 b) 

Cochlear nerve (Auditory pathway) (Fig. 4.12a): 

1) Primary auditory fibers: 

The cochlear nerve originates from bipolar nerve cells in 

the spiral ganglion of the inner ear. Their peripheral Cochlear 

processes end in relation to the hair cells of the organ of a 

Corti. Their central processes form the cochlear nerve, 

which enters the pons at the cerebello-pontine angle to 
Supedon divey 

terminate in the two cochlear nuclei; dorsal and ventral. 

ll} Secondary auditory fibers: 
Fig. 4.12a: The auditory pathway 

They originate from the cells of dorsal and ventral cochlear nuclei (Fig. 4.11). Their axons 

are grouped into three bundles (acoustic striae): (Fig. 4.12a) 

a) Ventral acoustic stria: it is the largest one that arises from the ventral cochlear 

nucleus. 

b) Dorsal acoustic stria: it arises from the dorsal cochlear nucleus 

¢) Intermediate acoustic stria: it arises from dorsal part of ventral cochlear nucleus. 

Course: 

e Fibers derived mainly from the ventral cochlear nucleus run transversally to form the 

trapezoid body between basis pontis and tegmentum of pons and crosses to join the 

lateral lemniscus of the opposite side. 

e Fibers of the dorsal and intermediate striae also cross to join the lateral lemniscus. 

es Some fibers terminate in the superior olive of the same and opposite sides and the nuclei 

of the trapezoid body. The axons of cells of these nuclei join the lateral lemniscus. 

Ill) Tertiary auditory fibers: 

e The lateral lemniscus ascends in the lateral part of the tegmentum till it reaches the 

midbrain. Most of its fibers end in the inferior colliculus, some fibers cross to the 

opposite inferior colliculus. 

e The inferior colliculus gives fibers to the medial geniculate body of thalamus, then these 

fibers project to the auditory cortex. 

252 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

The lateral lemniscus: It is formed of: 

1) The three acoustic stria; ventral, dorsal and intermediate stria. 

2) Fibers from superior olive of the same and opposite sides. 

3) Fibers from the nuclei of the trapezoid body. 

» NB: Efferent cochlear bundles: These are fibers arise from neurons surrounding the 
superior olivary nuclei. They project bilaterally to the hair cells of organ of Corti to 

suppress the auditory nerve activity. They inhibit impulses concerned with high 

frequency. 

The vestibular nuclei (Fig. 4.12 b): 

Site: in the floor of 4th ventricle: Superior vestibular 
nuclens 

a) The superior and the lateral nuclei are at the level of 
facial colliculus of Pons. 

Lateral vestibular 
b) The inferior and medial nuclei are at the level of open nucleus 

medulla. 
; . ; Medial vestibular 

Connections of the vestibular nuclei: nucleus Inferior vestibular 
nucleus 

1- Afferents: 

a) Vestibular nerve. 

b) Cerebello-vestibular fibers. 

2- Efferent or secondary vestibular fibers to: 

a) Cerebellum: mainly from inferior and medial nuclei. Fig. 4.12 b: The vestibular nuclei 

b) Spinal cord, from the lateral vestibular nucleus. 

c) Medial longitudinal fasciculus (MLF): from all vestibular nuclei to motor nuclei of cranial 

nerves that supply extra ocular muscles. 

Function: Conjugate eye movement. 

253 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Vestibular nerve: 

It arises from bipolar nerve cells in vestibular ganglion of the inner ear. Their peripheral 

processes receive impulses from hair cells of maculae of the utricle and saccules and crista 

ampularis. 

o The central processes form the vestibular nerve which enters the pons at the 

cerebello-pontine angle. The fibers are divided into short ascending and long 

descending fibers to terminate in the four vestibular nuclei (Lateral, medial, superior 

and inferior). 

e The vestibular nuclei give rise to vestibulo-cerebellar fibers (Secondary vestibular 

fibers). 

e Some fibers project directly to the cerebellum (Primary vestibular fibers). 

o Both primary and secondary vestibular fibers enter the cerebellum via the ICP to 

terminate in the ipsilateral flocculo-nodular lobe which is concerned with 

equilibrium. 

Facial nerve (VII): Nuclei: - It is a mixed nerve containing afferent and efferent fibers. 

1) Motor nucleus of facial nerve: 

-It lies in the pontine reticular formation, dorsal to the superior olive. The motor fibers 

project dorsomedially to loop around the abducent nucleus forming the facial colliculus then 

emerge at cerebellopontine angle. 

2) Superior salivatory nucleus: (Parasympathetic nucleus) 

It lies lateral to the motor nucleus of facial nerve. It gives secretory fibers to sublingual and 

submandibular salivary glands, nasal, buccal and palatine glands. 

1) Solitary nucleus: 

Its gustatory part receives taste sensation from the anterior 3% of the tongue. 

2) Spinal nucleus of trigeminal: 

It receives exteroceptive impulses from the external auditory meatus and area of skin back 

fo ear. 

Abducent nerve (Vi) 

The abducent nerve nucleus lies in the floor of the 4th ventricle at the inferior level of pons. it 

is surrounded by the root fibers of facial nerve. 

Course: Axons of cells pass ventrally to emerge from its ventral aspect, at the ponto-medullary 

junction. It supplies lateral rectus muscle of the same side. 

Connections: 

Bilateral corticonuclear fibers, 

Fibers relay around the nucleus of oculomotor ill that control conjugate eye movements. 

254 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Trigeminal nerve (V) (Fig. 4.13) 
The trigeminal nerve is a mixed nerve, mainly containing sensory fibers. 

The trigeminal nerve nuclei: 

1- Motor nucleus: Motor nucleus of trigeminal present in cranial part of pons (level of 

trigeminal nerve). It supplies muscles of mastication. 

Connections: 

a) Corticonuclear fibers from both sides. 

b) Mesencephalic nucleus: to increase force of bite. 

2- Three sensory nuclei: . 

a. Main sensory nucleus presents in pons lateral to motor nucleus and continuous with 

spinal nucleus. 

b. Spinal nucleus of trigeminal. 

c. Mesencephalic nucleus extends from pons to the upper midbrain level. It receives 

fibers concerned with proprioception. This nucleus is the 1st order neuron in the 

proprioceptive sensation from the face, extra-ocular muscles, muscles of the tongue, 

muscles of mastication and joint capsule of tempro-mandibular joint. 

Connections of Mesencephalic nucleus: 

a) Motor nucleus of trigeminal nerve. 

b) Trigeminal 

lemniscus. 

Fig. 4.13: Pons level of Trigeminal nerve 

255 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Course of the sensory fibers: (Nice to know) 

Cells of origin are unipolar cells of trigeminal ganglion. 

e The dendrites carry the sensation from the skin of the face by three divisions: 

ophthalmic, maxillary and mandibular. 

The central processes enter the brain stem at the midlevel of pons. They divide into 

descending and ascending fibers: 

1) The descending fibers: 

= These fibers run in the spinal tract of trigeminal in the medulla to terminate in spinal 

nucleus of V. gh 

= The spinal nucleus gives secondary trigeminal fibers which cross to the opposite side 

to ascend as the ventral trigemino-thalamic tract to end around cells of ventral 

postero-medial nucleus of thalamus (VPMN), then project to the sensory cortex. 

2) The ascending fibers: 

= These fibers are distributed to the main sensory nucleus. 

= Axons of the nucleus = secondary trigeminal fibers which ascend in the same and 

opposite sides forming the dorsal trigemino-thalamic tract that form trigeminal 

lemniscus (T). 

» The fibers end around cells of VPMN of thalamus, then they pass to the sensory cortex. 

Medial longitudinal fasiculus or bundle (MLF) 

Definition: It is an association bundle of fibers extending from the brain stem into the spinal 

cord. 

Position: It is a well-defined bundle in the brain stem and spinal cord cervical levels, below which 

it is only formed of separate fibers. 

Components: 

In the brain stem, it is formed of short ascending and descending fibers. In the spinal cord it is 

formed only of descending fibers (crossed and uncrossed) that originate from different nuclei at 

brain stem levels. 

1. Ascending fibers: 

» Vestibular fibers from medial and superior vestibular nuclei {Crossed and uncrossed) to 

the motor nuclei of 3rd, 4th and 6th cranial nerves supplying extraocular muscles. 

» Fibers from 6th nucleus connect with the 3rd nucleus for conjugate eye movements. 

2. Descending fibers: (Nice to know) 

a) Vestibulospinal fibers from the medial vestibular nucleus for neck movement. 

256 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

b) Reticulospinal fibers from the pontine reticular formation descend in MLF to end around 

motor neurons of spinal cord at all levels. 

c) Tectospinal fibers from the superior colliculus of the midbrain, fibers descend to VII 

nucleus to control the eye and neck movements. 

d) Interstitial nucleus of Cajal (interstitio-spinal). 

Functions: 

1} Coordination of reflex eye movements (tectospinal tract) and neck muscles 

in response to visual and auditory stimuli. 

2) Control of conjugate eye movement (vestibulo-ocular}. 

INTERNAL STRCTURE OF MIDBRAIN 
Parts of midbrain (Fig. 4.14) 

1) Tectum: this lies dorsal to the aqueduct of Sylvius which connects the third and fourth 

ventricles. The tectum contains four colliculi, two inferior and two superior colliculi. 

2) Tegmentum: this is the central part; it is the upward continuation of pontine reticular 

formation. It contains cranial nerve nuclei (IV and lll), red nucleus, reticular formation and 

ascending and descending tracts. 

3) Crus cerebri: this is the ventrolateral surface, containing the descending cortical projections. 

It replaces the basis pontis. 

Trochlearneve 

Tegmentum 

Substantia 

nigra 
Tempro, parieto, occipto- 

pontine fibers \ 
f 

Corticospinal and | | 
corticobulbar fibers _..=+ Crus cerebr 

Fronto-pontine fibers 

Fig. 4.14: Inferior Level of Midbrain 

257 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Crus cerebri: 

It is occupied by the descending fibers from the cerebral cortex. These fibers are arranged as 

follows: 

1) Fronto-pontine fibers, in the most medial part of the crus. 

2) Corticonuclear and corticospinal fibers, which occupy the intermediate part of the crus. 

Corticonuclear fibers are medial to corticospinal fibers. 

3) Tempro, parieto, occipto- pontine fibers, that occupy the most lateral part of the crus. 

Inferior colliculi: 

Position: these are ovoid masses in the inferior level of Midbrain tectum (Fig. 4.14). 

Connections: 

Afferent fibers from | Efferent fibers to: 
a) Lateral lemniscus. a) Medial geniculate body. 

b) Inferior colliculus of the opposite side. b) Inferior colliculus of the opposite side. 

c) Superior colliculus of the same side. c) Superior colliculus of the same side. 

d) Cortical auditory areas. 

Function: It is one of the relay stations of auditory pathway. 

The Trochlear nerve (IV) (Fig. 4.14) 

Position of nucleus: The nucleus lies ventral to periaqueductal gray at the level of inferior 

colliculus. 

Course: Root fibers curve dorsolaterally near the margin of central gray and decussate 

completely to supply superior oblique muscle. - 

Function: The fibers emerge from the dorsal surface of midbrain (Purely motor). 

Connections: 

a) Bilateral corticonuclear fibers. 

b) Medial longitudinal fasciculus. 

Substantia Nigra 
It is a curved lamina of gray matter. It lies between the crus cerebri and tegmentum. It shows 

maximum size at the level of superior colliculus (Fig. 4.15) 

Parts: 

1. Compact part (pars compacta): It has melanin containing cells with high content of 

dopamine. Degeneration of pars compacta causes decrease of dopamine in basal ganglia 

leading to Parkinsonism disease. 

258 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

2. Reticular part (pars reticularis): It is formed of large neurons. 

Superior colliculus 

Position: It is flattened laminated eminences in the superior level of the tectum. It is formed of 

alternating layers of white and gray matter (Fig. 4.15): 

Superior 
colliculus 

Tectum 

Red nucleus 
Tegmentum 

Substantia £2 

ww 
- = 

- 
- 

Oculomoior neve 

Fig. 4.15: Superior Level of Midbrain 

Connections: (Nice to know) 
Afferent fibers Efferent fibers 

1) Retino-tectal fibers: from retina crossed and a) Tectospinal tract which descends 
uncrossed fibers to cervical level. 

2) Corticotectal fibers: From the visual cortex. b) Some tectospinal fibers 

3) Brain stem nuclei: From incorporate in the MLF. 

a) Inferior colliculus of the same side. ¢) Tectopontine fibers to pontine 

b) Some auditory relay nuclei. nuclei. 

¢) Commissural fibers from the opposite side. d) Tectoreticular fibers pass to 

4) Spinotectal fibers: From the spinal cord. reticular formation of midbrain. 

Function: It is one of the relay stations of visual pathway 

259 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Oculomotor nerve (lll 

Position of the nucleus: It is a complex cell column that lies ventral to the periaqueductal 

gray close to the midline at the level superior colliculus (Fig. 4.15). 

It is composed of: (Fig. 4.16) | 

1. Paired lateral cell columns: include motor nuclei that innervate all extraocular muscles 

except superior oblique and lateral rectus. 

2. Caudal central nucleus: motor nucleus supplies all extraocular muscles except the 

superior oblique (supplied by IV) and the lateral rectus (supplied by Vi). 

3. Edinger-Westphal nucleus: it is 
. Edinger-Westphal 

parasympathetic nucleus. It gives the nucleus 

ciliary muscles for accommodation and 

the sphincter pupillae muscles for light 

reflex. Paired lateral 
cell column | 

Course: the fibers pass ventrally traversing 

the red nucleus and then pass in the inter- -_ 

peduncular fossa. Caudal central 
nucleus 

Connection of the motor nucleus of 

oculomotor nerve: Fig. 4.16: Occulomotor nuclear complex 

Bilateral corticonuclear, Vestibular 

nuclei, Abducent nerve nucleus. 

Red nucleus 
Position and characters (Fig. 4.15): 

It is present in the tegmentum of midbrain at level of superior colliculus. 

-It is pinkish in color due to high vascularity. 

-It is surrounded by fibers of the superior cerebellar peduncle 

-It is traversed by the rootlets of oculomotor nerve. 

Structure: it is formed of two parts: 

1. Caudal part: which is magnocellular (motor function). 

2. Rostral part: which is parvicellular (motor learning). 

Connections of the red nucleus: (Fig. 4.17) 

I. Afferent: 
1) Cerebello-rubral fibers: 

= From the dentate nucleus to the parvicellular part. 

= Fibers from the emboliform and globose cerebellar nuclei pass to the 

magnocellular part. 

2) Cortico-rubral fibers: from the cerebral cortex to the magnocellular part. These 

convey indirectly impulses from the cortex to the spinal cord. 

260 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Il. Efferents: 
1) Rubrospinal tract: the descending rubral Red nucleus  Interposed 

nuclei 

fibers cross in the ventral tegmental 
decussation to the spinal cord. 

2) Central tegmental tract: the uncrossed 
fibers descend from the parvicellular part 
to the inferior olivary nucleus. 

inferior olivary BR fibers 
nucleus 

Rubrospinal 
tract 5 

Tegmental decussations: 
The tegmentum of the midbrain contains the following decussations: 

I. At superior level: 
1) Dorsal tegmental decussation: Formed by the tectospinal fibers. 

2) Ventral tegmental decussation: Formed by rubrospinal fibers. 
Il. Atinferior level: 

1) Decussation of the superior cerebellar peduncle. 

2) Decussation of the trochlear nerve. 

Superior Cerebellar Peduncle (SCP) 
It connects the cerebellum with the midbrain. It is formed mostly of efferent fibers from deep 
cerebellar nuclei to red nucleus and reticular formation. 
Afferent fibers: Anterior Spinocerebellar tract, Tecto-cerebellar tract {from superior 

colliculus). 

261 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

COLUMNS OF CRANIAL NERVE NUCLEI 

The nuclei for the cranial nerves form columns in the brain stem. Each column gives origin to- 

or receives one type of fibers. They include three motor columns medially and four (actually 

three) sensory columns laterally; they are arranged from medial to lateral and from above 
downwards as follows (Fig. 4.18): 

1. General Somatic Efferent (GSE) column: motor to skeletal muscles that develop from 
myotomes {extraocular muscles and tongue muscles} i.e. it is somatomotor: 
a. Nucleus of Ill (in the midbrain at level of superior colliculus) 
a. Nucleus of IV (in the midbrain at level of inferior colliculus) 
b. Nucleus of VI {in pons) 
c. Nucleus of XII (in medulla oblongata) 

& Z,>  | 

\ SPS Motor 

NE Aotor Vil 

GSE : | KU NW “7 Sup. salivatory 
1, Dorsal cochlear “GS NEREESE=—=" Lacrimalan 
SVE Ventral cochlear 2 1 / inf .sativaten 

GVE Vestibular = yu Tar {8 ~ vagal 
CVASV A 

Solitailils Roya, Wi 
GSA. A/T5 Nc ambiguus 
GSA Spinal | 

Fig. 4.18: columns of cranial nerve nuclei in brain stem 

2. Special Visceral Efferent (SVE) column: They are branchiomotor supplying skeletal muscles 
that develop from the visceral (branchial or pharyngeal) arches. 
a. Motor nucleus of V in pons (supply muscles of the 1% arch; their details are mentioned 

below) 
b. Motor nucleus of Vil in pons (supply muscles that developed from the 2" arch; their 

details are mentioned below) 
¢. Nucleus Ambiguus in medulla oblongata, supply fibers to: 

- IX supplying muscles that develop from 3™ arch: stylopharyngeus 
- X & XI supplying muscles that develop from the 4" & 6!" arches: muscles of palate, 
pharynx and larynx. 

3. General Visceral Efferent (GVE) column: Gives preganglionic parasympathetic fibers. 

a. Edinger Westphal nucleus of (Ill) (in midbrain) supply ciliary muscle and sphincter 
pupillae muscle. 

b. Superior salivatory nucleus (Vil) supply submandibular and sublingual salivary glands. 

¢. Inferior salivatory nucleus (IX) supply parotid gland 

262 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

d. Dorsal vagal nucleus of (X); supply parasympathetic fibers to organs of the CVS, 
bronchial tree and most of the GIT (foregut & midgut). 

4. General & Special Visceral Afferent (GVA & SVA) columns: Nucleus Solitarius, receives 
sensation from viscera (GVA) and taste sensation (SVA) via cranial nerves VII, IX, X. 

5. General Somatic Afferent (GSA) column: 
a. Main sensory nucleus of V: receives crude touch from the head. 
b. Spinal nucleus of V: receives pain & temperature from the head. 
c. Mesencephalic nucleus of V: receives proprioception from the head. 

6. Special Somatic Afferent (SSA) column: 
Cochlear and Vestibular nuclei 

Details of nuclei of origin of the different cranial nerves 
There are twelve cranial nerves. Ail attach to the brain stem and have nuclei of origin within it 
except the first two cranial nerves: the olfactory & optic nerves. 

lll. Oculomotor nerve: 
1. Motor Nucleus (GSE): It lies in the midbrain at the level of the superior colliculus. Fibers 

arising from this nucleus supply all extra-ocular muscles except the superior oblique 
(supplied by IV) and the lateral rectus (supplied by Vi). 

2. Parasympathetic Nucleus (Edinger Westphal Nucleus) (GVE): Fibers arising from this 
nucleus pass with oculomotor nerve =? to its inferior division => to nerve to inferior 
oblique muscle => then leave this nerve to relay in ciliary ganglion = then postganglionic 
parasympathetic fibers run as short ciliary nerves that supply the ciliary muscle & 
sphincter pupillae muscle. {details of this nucleus can be postponed till Special Senses 
module) 

IV. Trochlear nerve: 

It is a purely motor nerve that supplies one muscle in the eye “superior oblique” Its nucleus 
(GSE) lies in the midbrain at level of inferior colliculus. - Fibers arising from the nucleus cross 
and emerge from dorsal surface of midbrain and pass to supply the opposite superior oblique. 

V. Trigeminal nerve: 
It is a mixed nerve. It has 1 motor & 3 sensory nuclei: 

1. Motor Nucleus (SVE): It is present in the cranial part of pons & its fibers supply muscles 
that developed from the 1st pharyngeal arch (4 muscles of mastication & 4 other muscles; 
tensor palate, tensor tympani; anterior belly of digastric & mylohoid) 

2. Three sensory nuclei that belong to (GSA) column: 
a. Main Sensory Nucleus: It is present in pons lateral to the motor nucleus. It receives 

touch fibers from head & face. 
b. Spinal Nucleus of V: It is present in pons & extends downwards to medulla & upper 

cervical levels of spinal cord. It receives pain & temperature from head & face. It 
receives also GSA sensory fibers from VII, IX & X cranial nerves. 

c. Mesencephalic Nucleus: It is present in pons & extends upwards to midbrain. It 
receives proprioceptive fibers from head & face. It contains pseudounipolar cells 
which are considered as 1st-order neuron 

263 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Vi. Abducent nerve: 
- It is a purely motor nerve that supplies one muscle in the eye “lateral rectus of the same 

side”. 
- its nucleus (GSE) lies in the pons deep to the medial eminence in the floor of fourth ventricle. 

Vil. Facial nerve: 
It is a mixed nerve. It has 2 motor & 2 sensory nuclei: 

3. Motor Nucleus (SVE): It is present in the caudal! part of pons. Fibers of the nucleus make 

a loop around the lower part of abducent nucleus, raising the facial colliculus in the floor 

of 4 ventricle. 
- Its fibers supply muscles that develop from the 2nd pharyngeal arch (muscles of facial 

expression, platysma, posterior belly of digastric, stylohyoid & stapedius). 

- The dorsal part of the nucleus that supplies muscles of the upper part of face receives 

bilateral cortico-nuclear fibers, while the ventral part of this nucleus that supplies 

muscles of the lower part of face receives only contra-lateral cortico-nuclear fibers. 

Thus, in an upper motor neuron lesion UMNL of the facial nerve, muscles of the upper 

face are spared while muscles of the lower face are affected. 

4. Parasympathetic nucleus (Superior salivatory nucleus) (GVE): Its fibers pass with the 

chorda tympani branch of facial nerve => relay in submandibular ganglion = 

postganglionic parasympathetic fibers supply submandibular & sublingual salivary glands. 

(see autonomic ganglia) 

5. Nucleus Solitarius (SVA): Its upper part receives taste fibers carried by chorda tympani 

from anterior 2/3 of tongue & by the greater petrosal nerve from the soft palate. 

6. Spinal Nucleus of Trigeminal (GSA): It receives fibers of general sensation from concha 

of ear. 

Vill. Vestibulocochlear nerve: 
It is a purely sensory nerve 
Vestibular & Cochlear Nuclei (SSA): These nuclei lie at the ponto-medullary junction. 

¢ Cochlear nuclei: dorsal & ventral 
e Vestibular nuclei: medial & lateral, superior & inferior. 

IX. Glossopharyngeal nerve: 
It is a mixed nerve. It has 2 motor & 2 sensory nuclei: 

1. Parasympathetic nucleus (Inferior salivatory nucleus) (GVE): its fibers pass with 

tympanic branch of IX = tympanic plexus => lesser petrosal nerve -=>.relay in otic ganglion 

-> postganglionic parasympathetic fibers reach & supply parotid gland via 

auriculotemporal nerve. (see autonomic ganglia) 

2. Nucleus Ambiguus (SVE): gives motor fibers which pass with glossopharyngeal nerve to 

supply the only muscle that develops from the 3rd pharyngeal arch (stylopharyngeus 

muscle). 

3. Nucleus Solitarius (SVA): Its middle part receives fibers of IX nerve carrying taste from 

posterior 1/3 of tongue & circumvallate papillae. 

4. Spinal Nucleus of Trigeminal (GSA): It receives fibers of IX nerve carrying general 

sensation from the oropharynx, posterior 1/3 of tongue, tonsils, auditory tube & middle 

ear. 

264 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

X. Vagus nerve: 
It is a mixed nerve.it has 2 motor & 2 sensory nuclei: 
e¢ Parasympathetic nucleus (dorsal motor nucleus of vagus (GVE): It lies in the medulla 

beneath the vagal trigone in the floor of the 4%" ventricle. Its fibers are motor to the 
involuntary muscles in thorax (heart & bronchi) and abdomen (GIT) till the end of the 
midgut. 

e Nucleus Ambiguus (SVE): Motor nucleus supply muscles that develop from 4th & 6 
pharyngeal arches which include muscles of palate (except tensor palati), muscles of 
pharynx (except stylopharyngeus) & muscles of larynx. 

e Nucleus Solitarius (SVA &GVA): Its lower part receives fibers of X nerve carrying taste 
from most posterior part of tongue, valleculae & epiglottis. it also receives general 
visceral sensations from the organs supplied by the vagus nerve. 

e Spinal Nucleus of Trigeminal (GSA): It receives fibers of X nerve carrying general sensory 
fibers of auricular branch of X. 

Xl. Accessory nerve: 
It is a motor nerve that consists of two parts: spinal & cranial parts. 
7. Spinal part: Its fibers take origin from the Spinal Nucleus located in the ventral horn of 

upper five cervical segments of the spinal cord. Fibers emerge from the spinal cord 
between the ventral and dorsal roots of spinal nerves. They supply the sternomastoid & 
trapezius. 

8. Cranial part: its fibers take origin from the lower part of the Nucleus Ambiguus (SVE). 
These fibers join vagus nerve in the jugular foramen to be distributed to muscles of palate 
{except tensor palate), muscles of pharynx (except stylopharyngeus) & muscles of larynx 

Xll. Hypoglossal nerve: 
It is a motor nerve 

Hypoglossal nucleus (GSE) 
- lies in the medulla oblongata deep to the hypoglossal trigone in the floor of 4t" ventricle. 
- It extends down to the closed medulla. 
- Fibers arising from the hypoglossal nucleus supply all muscles of tongue except the 

palatoglossus muscle. 
- The part of the hypoglossal nucleus that innervates genioglossus muscle receives 

contralateral cortico-nuclear fibers only. 

Note: 

e 3 cranial nerves are purely sensory (I, Il & VIII), 5 cranial nerves are purely motor (lll, IV, 
VI, XI & Xl), 4 cranial nerves are mixed {V, VII, IX & X); each of the mixed nerves has 4 
nuclei. 

e All motor nuclei of cranial nerves receive bilateral cortico-nuclear tract fibers except the 
part of facial nucleus that innervates muscles of lower part of face & the part of 
hypoglossal nucleus that innervates genioglossus muscle. These two exceptions receive 
contralateral cortico-nuclear fibers only so are liable to an UMNL. 

e Nucleus Ambiguus is shared by 3 cranial nerves IX, X, XI. 
e Nucleus Solitarius is shared by 3 cranial nerves Vil, IX, X. 

e Spinal nucleus of trigeminal is shared by all cranial nerve that carry fibers of general 
sensation, V, Vil, IX, X. 

265 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

BLOOD SUPPLY OF THE BRAIN STEM 

The medulla: is supplied by the four branches of the vertebral artery (Fig. 4.19) 

1. Anterior spinal artery: supplies the part of the medulla medial to hypoglossal nerve 

(containing the XII nucleus, medial lemniscus& pyramid). 

Its occlusion = Medial medullary syndrome which involves the following: 

Pyramid => contralateral hemiplegia of the UMNL type but paralysis is flaccid! 

Medial lemniscus => contralateral loss of proprioception & fine touch 

Xil nucleus => ipsilateral LMNL paralysis of tongue muscles (ask patient to protrude 

tongue, it deviates towards paralyzed side). 
2. Posterior inferior cerebellar artery (PICA): supplies lateral part of MO. 

> PICA occlusion => Lateral medullary syndrome which involves the following: 
Spino-cerebellar tract & ICP > cerebellar ataxia. 
Spinal N. & tract of V =>loss of pain & temp. from ipsilateral face. 

Spinal lemniscus => loss of pain & temp. from opposite half of body. 

Nucleus ambiguus => ipsilateral paralysis of palate, pharynx, larynx. 

Nucleus solitarius—>loss of taste sensation. 
Descending sympathetic fibers => ipsilateral Horner's syndrome (ptosis, miosis, 

anhydrosis, enophthalmos). 
3. Medullary branches of vertebral artery: supply intermediate area of medulla oblongata 

(i.e., olive). 
4. Posterior spinal artery: supplies posterior part of closed medulla (ie gracile & cuneate 

nuclei) 

The pons is supplied by branches of basilar artery. 
Applied anatomy: pontine hemorrhage => pin-point pupil + hyperpyrexia + quadriplegia 

The midbrain is supplied by branches of the posterior cerebral & superior cerebellar arteries. 

Fig. 4.19: Medullary vascular syndromes 

266 

pop Tw DOOY  



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

CRANIAL CAVITY 

(Please refer to theb ony structure of cranial cavitiyn practical) 

CRANIAL DURA MATER (Fig. 4.20) 
It is the outermost, thickest and toughest membrane covering brain. It is arranged in 2 layers: 
1. Outer (endosteal) layer: serves as endosteum to the skull bones 
2. Inner (meningeal) layer. 

- The two layers are fused together except in certain regions where the inner layer dips 
to form folds between different parts of the brain, OR when the outer and inner layers 
separate to enclose a venous sinus between them. 

Emissary vein Arachnoid granulations 

Superior sagittal sinus Bone of 
A calvaria 

CER SEEEERY A Wy Dura mater: 
- 
% 

Tad he = iC oo. Meningeal layer 
Arachnoid mater 

. Sf= < 4p yr = Pia mater 

\ ¥ 

Cerebral falx 

rig. 4.£U: Lranial aura mater 

DURAL FOLDS (SEPTA): (Fig. 4.21) 
» They are formed by the meningeal (inner) layer of the dura mater reduplicates to form 

partition-like processes, between different parts of the brain. 
» Function: They help to stabilize the brain within the cranial cavity during movements of 

head. 
» These folds are: Falx cerebri, Tentorium cerebelli, Falx cerebelli, Diaphragma sellae 

Inferior sagittal 
Falx cerebri sinus 

Cranium 

Superior 
sagittal 
sinus Tentorium 

+cerebelli 

Transverse 
sinus 

~ cerebelli 

Fig. 4.21: Dural folds and some dural sinuses 

267 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

1- Ix cerebri: 
» Shape: Large Sickle-shaped. 
> Site: It is present vertically along the median fissure between the 2 cerebral 

hemispheres. 
> Attachments: Apex (anteriorly): is attached to crista galli + frontal crest. 

- Base (posteriorly): attached to upper surface of tentorium cerebelli enclosing the 

straight sinus. 
- Upper border (to lips of sagittal sulcus enclosing sup. Sagittal sinus. 
- Lower free border (concave) encloses inf. sagittal sinus. 

Falx cerebelli: 
>» Shape: small sickle-shaped 
> Site: It is present vertically in the posterior cranial fossa between the 2 cerebellar 

hemispheres. 

ntori r li: 
» Shape: Tent-shaped 
> Site: It forms a horizontal roof for the posterior cranial fossa between cerebral and 

cerebellar hemispheres. 
> Attachments: Attached border to lips of transverse sulcus + upper border of petrous 

bone posterior clinoid processes. 
- Free border forming U-shaped tentorial notch between anterior clinoid processes, 
for passage of midbrain. 

> Relations: At point of crossing of its two margins, the 3 & 4™ cranial nerves are 
related (3 in front of point of crossing & the 4th at the point of crossing). 

4- Diaphragma sellae; (Fig. 4.22) 
- It is a small rounded dural fold extending between the 4 clinoid processes roofing the 
hypophyseal fossa. 

- It has a central opening for passage of the infundibulum of pituitary gland 
3rd infundibulum 

ventricle 
“am / Diaphragma sellae 
AT ALT, . 
A lhA  Meningeal 
Dene . oe on & yer 
Ne Te 3m 4 AR Budisdtedt 5 
2S Ag d ? 83 ayer 
FRAN FEA 5 
2SaI pEo  Y A. 035 0  

2 ne ow 

Sphenoidal air Hypophyseal fossa Pituitary gland 
sinus 

Fig. 4.22: Diaphragma sellae 

268 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

* Nerve supply of dura: 

The dura is supplied mainly by 3 divisions of trigeminal + upper 3 cervical nerves + 
sympathetic nerves. 
a. Ant. cranial fossa by ant. ethmoidal n. mainly + maxillary n. partly. 
b. Middle cranial fossa by maxillary n. in ant.1/2 + mandibular n. in post 1/2. 
c. Posterior cranial fossa by meningeal branches of 10!" & 12" ns. + Recurrent branches 

of C1, 2& 3 ns. 
The recurrent tentorial branch supplies the tentorium cerebelli. 

Applied anatomy: Skull trauma may lead to some injuries such as: 
1. Extradural hemorrhage: is less common, usually of arterial origin due to injury of middle 

meningeal vessels, leads to cerebral compression. 
2. Subdural hemorrhage: is more common, usually of venous origin, also has cerebral 

compression signs, RBCs are commonly present in CSF. 

VENOUS DURAL SINUSES: (Fig. 4.23) 
>» Definition: are venous channels lying between the 2 dural layers. 
» General notes: 

- They are lined by endothelium. 
- They have no muscular wall & are valveless. 
- They drain brain, meninges, bones & CSF. 
- They are connected to extracranial veins via emissary veins drain finally into UV. 

» Classification: They are divided into 6 paired, 4 single & 2 multiple sinuses. 
a) 6 Paired sinuses: are usually peripheral in position & are arranged antero- posteriorly 

as follows: 
1- Sphenoparietal 
2- Cavernous 
3- Superior petrosal 
4- Inferior petrosal 
5- Sigmoid 
6- Transverse 

b) 4 Single sinuses: are present in the median plane. 
1- Superior sagittal 
2- Inferior sagittal Related to falx cerebri 
3- Straight 
4- Occipital: is related to Falx cerebelli. 

¢) 2 Multiple: usually connect dural sinuses on both sides of the body 
1- Intercavernous (anterior, middle & posterior): connect the 2 cavernous sinuses 

together. 
2- Basilar plexus of veins: connect the 2 inferior petrosal sinuses together. 

269 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Fig. 4.23: Venous dural sinuses 

Details of some dural sinuses: 
1) Superior sagittal sinus: 

> Site: Along the upper attached margin of falx cerebri. 

» Course: 
a. Starts anteriorly at crista galli (here it may communicate with the veins of frontal 

sinus & occasionally with veins of the nose through foramen caecum) 

b. Ends opposite internal occipital protuberance by turning usually to the right side to 

continue as the right transverse sinus. 
¢. The dilated posterior end of the superior sagittal sinus is referred to as the 

confluence of sinuses. 
» Tributaries: 

i. Superior cerebral veins. 
ii. Arachnoid villi and granulations 

2) Cavernous sinus: (Fig. 4.24 & Fig. 4.25) 

>» General notes: It is a large venous space lying in middle cranial fossa, on either side of 

body of sphenoid bone. It is called “cavernous” because of its spongy nature. 

> Extent: Its anterior end reaches the medial end of superior orbital fissure, while its 

posterior end reaches the apex of petrous temporal bone. 

» Dimensions: About 2cm long & 1cm wide. 

» Relations: 
a) External relations 

- Anteriorly: Superior orbital fissure & the apex of orbit, 

- Posteriorly: Apex of petrous temporal bone. 

- Medially: Pituitary gland & sphenoidal air sinus. 
- Laterally: Temporal lobe. 

270 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

ae Superior orbital 
— fissure 

p Middle cranial 
| fossa 

Circular venous # 
plexus 

| Cavernous sinus ~~ Apex of petrous 
: — bone 

Superior petrosal Basilar plexus 
sinus 

Inferior petrosal 
sinus 

Fig. 4.24: Relations of the cavernous sinus 

b) Structures in the lateral wall of the sinus from above downwards: 
i. Oculomotor nerve: In its anterior part, it divides into its 2 divisions. 

ii. Trochlear nerve. 
iii. Ophthalmic nerve: In its anterior part, it divides into its 3 divisions. 
iv. Maxillary nerve: leaves the sinus through foramen rotundum. 

¢) Structures passing through the sinus: ICA with its sympathetic plexus & abducent 
nerve (inferolateral to the artery) 

N.B.: The structures in the lateral wall & center of the sinus are separated from the blood by 
the endothelial lining of the sinus 

Internal carotid artery 

Temporal lobe 

Ocalomotor nerve -Fituitary gland 
Trochlear nerve Cavernous sinus 
Ophthalmic nerve 

Abdncent nerve - \ 
Maxillary nerve er Sphenoidal air sinus 

\_ 
Internal carotid artery 

Fig. 4.25: Structures in the cavernous sinus 

271 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

» Tributaries: (Fig. 4.26) 
a. From the orbit: 

(i) Superior ophthalmic vein 
(ii) Inferior ophthalmic vein 
(iii) Central vein of retina. 
b. From the brain 

(i) Superficial middle cerebral vein. 
(ii) Inferior cerebral vs. from temporal lobe. 
¢. From the meninges: 

(i) Sphenoparietal sinus. 
(ii) Frontal trunk of middle meningeal vein. 

» Drainage: The cavernous sinus drains into: 
a. Superior petrosal sinus = Transverse sinus. 
b. Inferior petrosal sinus => IJV. 

» Communications with: 
a. Pterygoid venous plexus via emissary vs. 
b. Facial v. via superior ophthalmic v. 
¢. Its fellow on the opposite side via the 3 intercavernous sinuses. 

N.B.: All these communications are valveless and allow blood flow in either 
direction. 

m ” 1.From Orbit 
| Tributaries | sSuperior ophthalmic V a | Communications | 

»Inferior ophthalmic V 
aCentral vein of retina | 

2.From meninges | 
ee Facial vein 

» Sphenoparietal sinus 
= Middle meningealV Pterygoid 

plexus of veins 
3.From brain 
Superficial middle cerebral V./* | 
sinferior cerebral V Emissary vein through 

foramen ovale and 
spinosum 

Draining channels | ® 
Superior petrosal sinus = 4 Basilar plexus of veins 

rat 
Inferior petrosal sinus | 

Internal vertchral 
Sigmoid Sinus venous plexus 

Transverse Sinus 

Fig. 4.26: Tributaries and communications of cavernous sinus 

Applied Anatomy: 
a. Thrombosis of cavernous sinus: Is caused by spread of infection from the dangerous area 

of face. This affects cranial nerves lil, IV & VI. 
b. Carotid-cavernous sinus fistula: An arterio-venous communication resulting from head 

injuries; or rupture of aneurysm of ICA into the cavernous sinus, leading to unilateral 

pulsating exophthalmos. 

272 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Flow of Blood in Venous Sinuses: (Fig. 4.27) 

1. Venous blood passes in superior sagittal sinus from before backward to the confluence of 
sinuses, where it usually continues as the right transverse sinus. 

2. Blood flows in inferior sagittal sinus posteriorly to be joined by the great cerebral vein to 
form the straight sinus. 

. Straight sinus usually continues as the left transverse sinus. 

. Transverse sinus unites with superior petrosal sinus to form the sigmoid sinus. 
5. Sigmoid sinuses on both sides continue, after emerging from jugular foramina, as the 

internal jugular veins on both sides of neck. 
6. Blood flows in cavernous sinuses posteriorly where they are drained by superior petrosal 

sinus into the transverse sinus & by the inferior petrosal sinus into WV. 

Superior 
sagittal sinus 

Inferior 
sagittal sinus 

Confluence of 
sinuses 

Internal jugular vin 

Fig. 4.27: Flow of Blood in Venous Sinuses 
EMISSARY VEINS: (Fig. 4.28) 

- They are valveless veins connecting dural sinuses & extracranial veins. 
- They are of clinical importance in: 

1. Equalizing venous pressure between outside & inside the skull; acting as safety valves. 
2. Spreading infection from outside to inside the skull. 

- Classification: according to the intracranial dural sinuses: 
1. Emissary veins connected to the superior sagittal sinus: 

a. With scalp veins through the parietal foramen. 
b. With nasal veins through the foramen caecum. 

2. Emissary veins connected to the cavernous sinus: 
a. With pterygoid plexus: through emissary sphenoidal foramen, foramen lacerum 
& ovale. 

b. With internal jugular vein through carotid canal. 
c. With facial vein through superior and inferior ophthalmic veins 

3. Emissary veins connected to the sigmoid sinus: 
a. With internal jugular vein through the hypoglossal canal. 
b. With occipital vein through the mastoid foramen. 
c. With suboccipital plexus through the condylar canal. 

273 

§ ee ————————— — pa = — = BD 

WwW 

r Pa a®g  
| a ag ho I 

lg 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

a — a a 

Pfr r Superior sagittal sinus 

Connection to scalp veins via 
parietal foramen. 

Connection to masal veins via 
foramen caecum. 

Fig. 4.28: Emissary veins 

Trigeminal Ganglion (Semilunar ganglion): (Fig. 4.29) 

It is the sensory ganglion of the fifth cranial nerve (trigeminal nerve), being similar to the 

dorsal root ganglia of the spinal nerves. 
>» Site: 

o It lies in trigeminal impression, on anterior surface of apex of petrous temporal bone, 

The small motor root of trigeminal nerve is attached to the pons, then it passes beneath the 

ganglion, and then out through foramen ovale, to join the mandibular nerve in the 

infratemporal fossa. 

Fig. 4.29: Trigeminal ganglion 

Cranial Nerves (Intracranial Course): (Fig. 4.30) 
1. First (olfactory) nerve, seen as 15-20 filaments on each side, piercing the cribriform plate 

of ethmoid bone to end in the olfactory bulb. 
2. Second (optic) nerve, passes through optic canal with ophthalmic artery. 

3. Third (oculomotor) nerve pierces the dura mater in front of the point of crossing of the 

free margin and the attached margin of the tentorium cerebelli. 

4. Fourth (trochlear) nerve pierces the dura mater at the point of crossing of the free margin 

and the attached margin of the tentorium cerebelli. 

274 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

5. Fifth (trigeminal) nerve is composed of a large sensory root and a smaller motor root. The 
large sensory root forms the trigeminal ganglion that gives off 3 divisions: 
a. The ophthalmic and maxillary divisions run in the lateral wali of the cavernous sinus. 
b. The mandibular division {with the motor root), pass directly through the foramen 

ovale. 
6. Sixth (abducent) nerve runs forwards inside the cavernous sinus with CA. 
7. Seventh (Facial) nerve 
8. Eighth (Vestibulo-cochlear) nerve 
9. Ninth (Glossopharyngeal) nerve 
10. Tenth (Vagus) nerve 
11. Eleventh (Accessory) nerve 

5 rei Wy 

vial : a A 
a EE 

3 = FN ta . 

i . . 'e 

1 br) nte's I A = 3 XE 

gt) wy 

“orbiial Plate if Frontal 72080 N 
A RE / , 2 hi 5 iA, : 

L] by E. h ; : 

ul ed, 
oy 5 

— » ; B= 
ake a Posterior Fo £ : 

= _— ; LF =, = Ke LS 

= # SNe 4, a yo hd 
- “Tam 3 a 

Fa a, § = 

Pe, 3 . % é 

Fa = 8 Era | 3 Sor 154 RY L «i 

Fig. 4.30: Cranial nerves 

Middle Meningeal Artery: (Fig. 4.31) 

» Origin: from the first part of maxillary artery within the infratemporal fossa. 
» Course: 

a. Runs upwards, between the roots of the auriculotemporal nerve to enter the middle 
cranial fossa through the foramen spinosum. 

b. In the middle cranial fossa, it has an extradural course, between the two layers of the 
dura. Here, the artery grooves the squamous temporal, and divides into frontal 
(anterior) and parietal (posterior) branches. 

c. lt supplies only small branches to dura mater; however, it is predominantly a periosteal 
artery supplying skull bones. It does not supply brain or the pia and arachnoid. 

» Surface Anatomy: 
a. Artery enters skull opposite a point immediately above the middle of zygomatic arch. 

275 

oy yh WF A 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Intracranial part of ICA: (Fig. 4.32) 

» Origin: Begins in the neck as one of the terminal branches of CCA at the level of upper 
border of thyroid cartilage. 

» Course: Divided into 4 parts: 
1) Cervical part: Within the carotid sheath. 
2) Petrous part: enters the skull through the carotid canal, to enter the cranial cavity 

via the foramen lacerum. 
3) Cavernous part: passes forward in the cavernous sinus with the abducent nerve 

inferolateral to it. 
4) Cerebral part: emerges through roof of cavernous sinus medial to anterior clinoid 

process. 
» Terminates opposite anterior perforated substance by dividing into anterior and middle 

cerebral arteries (ACA & MCA). 
» Branches: 

e Cervical part has no branches 
e Petrous part gives the following: 

1- Corticotympanic branches to the middle ear. 
2- Pterygoid branches to pterygoid canal. 

eo Cavernous part gives the following: 
1. Branches to the trigeminal ganglion. 
2. Hypophyseal branches to hypophysis cerebri. 
3. Meningeal branch to dura of anterior cranial fossa. 

e Cerebral part gives the following: 
1. Ophthalmic. 
2. Posterior communicating 
3. Anterior choroidal branches. 
4. Anterior& middle cerebral (terminals) 

| Cerebral part Cavernous sinus 

— dl... Patrous parotf 
Patrous part Fs, temporal bone 

|C ervical part 

External 
carotid sntery 

Upper border 
Internal carotid artery 

Fig. 4.32: Internal carotid artery 

277 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

THE SCALP 

I. DEFINITION: It is the soft tissue that covers the vault of 
the skull. 

Il. EXTENT: (Fig. 4.33) 
e Anteriorly: Supra- orbital margin. 
e Posteriorly: External occipital protuberance and 

highest nuchal line. 
e Laterally: Superior temporal line. 

Fig.4.33: Extent of the scalp 
I1I.LAYERS: (Fig. 4.34) 

- The scalp is formed of 5 layers. The letters of the word "scalp" indicate each of these 

layers: 
S = Skin 
C = Connective tissue 
A = Aponeurosis 
L = Loose areolar tissue 
P = Pericranium. 

The first 3 layers are adherent together. 

Skin Dense connective tissue Aponsurotic layer 

Fig. 4.34: Layers of the scalp 
Pericranium 

1. Skin: Thick, hairy, highly vascular, rich in sweat and sebaceous glands (common site for 

sebaceous cyst due to blockage of the duct draining the sebaceous gland). 

2. Connective Tissue: it is a dense connective tissue, containing arteries, veins, nerves & 

lymphatics. It contains also septa that connect this layer with the layer above & the layer 

below: thus, the first 3 layers are adherent. The septa divide the layer into partitions that 

are filled with fat. 
Since the connective tissue is dense: 

(a) Infection tends to remain localized, however it causes pain. 
(b) Wounds do not gap. 
(c) A small wound causes profuse bleeding because the walls of arteries adhere to the 

connective tissue septa, which prevent them from contraction or retraction. 

3. Aponeurosis called Epicranial Aponeurosis: A strong fibrous sheet adherent to the first 2 

layers and it covers the skull vault like a helmet. 
e Anteriorly: it receives the insertion of frontal bellies of Occipito-frontalis. 

278 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

eo Laterally: it is attached to the superior temporal line. 
eo Posteriorly: it receives the insertion of occipital bellies of Occipito-frontalis (A 

wound reaching this layer gaps because of contraction of the muscle). 
Occipito-frontalis muscle: (Fig. 4.35) 
It is the muscle of the scalp that has 2 frontal and 2 occipital bellies. 

Table 4.1: Comparison between Frontal bellies and occipital bellies 
aE Frontalbelies =~ | = Occipital bellies. 

Origin They are wider, partly united in | They are narrower separated from each 
a | midline; each arises from the other by an extension of epicranial 

| skin of eyebrows. aponeurosis, each arises from lateral 
x 215 2/3 of the highest nuchal line. 

Insertion | Epicranial aponeurosis Epicranial aponeurosis 
Nerve supply Temporal branch of facial nerve | Posterior auricular branch of facial | 
a nerve 
Action Pull the scalp forward and raise | Pull the scalp backwards 

| the eyebrows producing 
| transverse wrinkles in the 

forehead skin. 

Ta 

Fig.4.35: Occipitofrontalis muscle 
4. Loose connective tissue: 

o tis continuous anteriorly with the similar layer of the upper eyelid. 
o Allows free mobility of the previous 3 layers on skull bones. 
o This loose areolar tissue allows spread of blood or pus beneath the aponeurosis. -- 

Blood or pus cannot pass to back of neck because of attachment of occipital bellies of 
occipito-frontalis to the occipital bone but can pass anteriorly since frontal bellies are 
not attached to bone, blood can enter the eyelids resulting in “Black eye”. 

o Itis considered the dangerous layer of the scalp as its emissary veins can spread 
infection from the scalp to the cranial cavity. 

5. Pericranium: 
o tis the periosteum of the skull bones; at the sutures it is continuous with the sutural 

ligaments and it is continuous with the inner periosteum at skull foramina. 
o Hemorrhage beneath this layer leads to a collection of blood (hematoma) that takes 

the shape of the underlying skull bone. 

279 

pe ——_ — = = = 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

IV. BLOOD SUPPLY: 
o The scalp has rich blood supply. 
o The arteries anastomose freely with each other. 
o They are branches of either the external carotid artery (ECA) or internal carotid artery 

(ICA). 
A) Arteries of the scalp: (Fig.4.36) 

Table 4.2: Arteries of the scalp 
Artery | Distribution 

Supratrochlear & | -Both are branches of ophthalmic a. from ICA. 
Supraorbital -They supply skin of forehead. The supraorbital artery supplies the 

arteries scalp up to the level of vertex. 
One of 2 terminal branches of ECA. 

’ = - Ascends in front of tragus of ear where its pulsations could be felt. 

SEER EERE |< Supplies skin of temple and side of scalp. 
Posterior -Branch of ECA. 

~ Auricular artery 
Occipital artery | - Branch of ECA. 

Fig. 4.36: Arteries of the scalp 
Fig. 4.37 Veins of the scalp 

B) Veins of the scalp: (Fig. 4.37) 
- Veins of the scalp accompany the arteries and have similar names. 

- Veins of the scalp anastomose freely with one another and are connected to diploic 
veins of the skull bone and intracranial venous sinuses by "emissary veins". 

1. Supratrochlear & supraorbital veins unite at the medial angle of eye to 

form the facial vein (anterior facial). 
2. Superficial temporal vein unites with maxillary vein inside parotid gland to 

form retromandibular vein. The latter leaves the lower end of the parotid 
gland dividing into anterior and posterior divisions. 

280 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

3. Facial vein unites with the anterior division of retromandibular to form 
common facial vein that ends in internal jugular vein (JV). 

4. Posterior auricular vein unites with the posterior division of 
retromandibular vein to form the external jugular vein (EJV). 

5. Occipital vein drains the scalp posteriorly and ends into the suboccipital 
venous plexus. 

Emissary Veins (Fig. 4.38) 
- They are valve less veins that pass-through skull foramina to connect veins inside the 

cranial cavity (venous sinuses) with veins outside the cranial cavity. 
- Some are constant, while others may be absent. 
- They help to reduce venous pressure inside the cranial cavity, but they may be the 

routes of spread of infection from outside to the cranial cavity « 
- Example: Parietal emissary vein pass through parietal emissary foramen to connect 

veins of the scalp with superior sagittal sinus inside the skull. 

Fig. 4.38: Emissary Veins | 
V. NERVE SUPPLY: (Fig. 4.39) 

The scalp is supplied by 10 nerves (5 pre-auricular & 5 are retro- auricular: 4 sensory & 1 
motor). 

Table 4.3: Nerve supply of the scalp 
In Front of the auricle | Behind the auricle 

4 Sensory nerves: (branches of trigeminal | 4 Sensory nerves: (branches of cervical 
nerve) spinal nerves) 
1. Supratrochlear n. {from ophthalmic n.) 1. Great auricular n. (C 2, 3) supplies skin of 
supplies skin of forehead scalp behind auricle. 
2. Supraorbital n. (from ophthalmic n.) 2. Lesser occipital n. (C 2) supplies skin of 
supplies skin of forehead up to the vertex scalp behind auricle. 
3. Zygomaticotemporal n. (from maxillary 3. Greater occipital n. (C 2) supplies skin of 
n.) supplies non-hairy part of temporal scalp up to vertex. 
region 4. Third occipital n. (C 2) supplies skin of | 
4, Auriculotemporal n. (from mandibular n.) | lower part of occiput. | 
supplies the hairy part of temporal region | 
1 Motor nerve: 1 Motor nerve: 
Temporal branch of facial nerve supplies Posterior auricular branch of facial nerve 
frontal belly of occipito-frontalis. supplies occipital belly of occipitofrontalis. 

281 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Fig. 4.39: Nerve supply of the scalp 

VI. LYMPH DRAINAGE: 
- Pre auricular region: drained by parotid L.N. 

- Post auricular region: drained by mastoid & occipital L.Ns. 

ANATOMY OF THE FACE 

BOUNDARIES (Fig. 4.40) 
e Superiorly: The hair line. 
e Inferiorly: The lower border of mandible. 
eo Sideways: From one auricle to the other. 
(Thus, the forehead is common to both scalp and face). 

LAYERS: 
1. Skin: possesses numerous sweat and sebaceous glands. It Fig. 4.40: Boundaries of the face 

gives attachment to the muscles of facial expression. 
2. Superficial fascia: contains blood vessels, nerves, muscles & small amount of fat. 

3. Deep fascia is absent in most of the face except at the parotid gland and over 
buccinator muscle. 

Arteries of the face: (Fig. 4.41) 
e Two branches of ECA: The facial and the superficial temporal arteries which are 

considered the main supply of the face 
e Two branches of ICA: The Supratrochlear & supra-orbital arteries, supply the forehead. 

o Three small branches of maxillary artery: infra-orbital, mental and buccal. 

282 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

ie 

Fig. 4.41: arteries of the face 

1) Facial artery: (Fig. 4.42) is the chief supply of the face. 
Origin: a branch of ECA, it starts just above the tip of greater cornu of hyoid bone. it 
has a course in the neck and in the face 
Course in the face: 

- Enters the face by winding around the lower border of mandible & pierces 
the deep cervical fascia at antero-inferior angle of masseter m. 

- Runs upward & medially near the angle of mouth, ascend by the side of the 
nose till the medial angle of eye where it ends. 

- tis a tortuous artery to permit free movement of mandible, lips and 
cheeks. 

Termination: At the medial angle of eye, by anastomosing with dorsal nasal a. (a 
branch of ophthalmic a.). 
Branches in the face: 
1. Inferior labial, to lower lip. 2. Superior labial, to upper lip. 
3. Lateral nasal, to ala of nose. 4- Angular artery, to medial angle of eye 
5. Unnamed small muscular branches 
Anastomosis: 
a) The similar branches of both sides anastomose with each other in the midline. 
b) At the medial angle of eye, it anastomose with dorsal nasal of ophthalmic a. This is 

considered as anastomosis between the ICA & ECA. 

2) Superficial temporal artery: 
e Arises in the parotid gland as one of 2 terminal branches of the ECA. 
e Transverse facial artery arises from the superficial temporal artery within the 

parotid gland, runs forward across the cheek just above the parotid duct to supply 
the face. 

283 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

a —————— — 

Fig. 4.42: Facial artery 

VEINS OF THE FACE: (Fig. 4. 43) 
- Supratrochlear & supraorbital veins unite at the medial angle of eye to form the 

angular vein which continues as the anterior facial vein. 

- The superficial temporal vein unites with maxillary vein to form the 
retromandibular vein which divides into anterior & posterior divisions. 

- The anterior division unites with anterior facial vein to form the common facial 
vein that ends in internal jugular vein (LV). 

- The posterior division unites with the posterior auricular vein to form external 

jugular vein (EJV) that ends in the subclavian vein. 
Deep communications of anterior facial vein: 
It is connected with cavernous sinus via 2 routes: 

a) Facial vein is connected to superior ophthalmic vein which drains in cavernous sinus, 

b) Facial vein is connected to pterygoid venous plexus via the deep facial vein. 

c) Pterygoid venous plexus is connected to cavernous sinus via 3 emissary veins. 

Fig. 4.43: Veins of the face 

284 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Dangerous area of the face (Fig. 4.44) a bz _. 
The triangular area of facial skin including upper lip, nose and a I 
medial angles of eye is considered dangerous area of face. If this 
area became infected e.g. by squeezing a boil on the skin of nose, 
the infection would spread to the cavernous sinus causing its 
thrombosis. 

Fig. 4.44: Dangerous area of the face 
NERVE SUPPLY: 
A) Sensory Nerve Supply of Face: (Fig.4.45 a) 
Skin of face is supplied mainly by branches of trigeminal nerve (V), except for a small area 
over the angle of mandible and capsule of parotid gland which are supplied by great 
auricular nerve (C2&3) which is a branch of cervical plexus. 

e Branches of Ophthalmic nerve: 
1. Supratrochlear: supplies skin of forehead. 
2. Supraorbital: supplies skin of forehead and skin of scalp up to the vertex. 
3. Palpebral branch of lacrimal: supplies lateral part of upper eye lid. 
4. Infratrochlear: supplies skin of medial part of upper eye lid and adjacent 

part of nose. 
5. External nasal: supplies skin of nose down to its tip. 

e Branches of Maxillary nerve: 
1. Zygomaticotemporal: supplies non-hairy part of temporal region 
2. Zygomaticofacial: supplies skin over zygomatic bone 
3. Infraorbital: It gives 3 branches: 

- Palpebral branch to the lower eye lid. 
- Nasal branch to the side and ala of nose. 
- Labial branch to the upper lip. 

e Branches of Mandibular nerve: 
1. Auriculotemporal: supplies hairy part of temporal region and auricle. 
2. Buccal: supplies skin of cheek over buccinators m. 
3. Mental: supplies skin of chin and lower lip. 

Anricnistemporal nerve 

Zygomaticotem poral merve 

Zygomaticofacial nerve 

Infraorbital aerve 

Great auricular nerve — / ul ental nerve 

Ophthalmic 

© Afaxillary 
0 ABaandibular 

Fig. 4. 45a: Sensory nerves of the face 

B) Motor Nerve Supply of the Face (Fig. 4.45b) 

285 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Facial nerve 
- It leaves the skull through the stylomastoid foramen. 
- Branches in the neck: 

1. Posterior auricular branch to supply the occipital belly of occipito-frontalis and 

auricular muscles. 
2. Muscular branch to supply posterior belly of digastric and stylohyoid muscles. 

- Then, the facial nerve enters the parotid gland, where it forms a plexus called “Pes 

Anserinus” & then divides into its five terminal branches, which emerge from the 

anterior border of the gland and runs forwards across the face to supply facial 

muscles. 
- The terminal branches are: 

1. Temporal to frontalis and orbicularis oculi, 

2. Zygomatic to orbicularis oculi and other nearby muscles, 

3. Buccal to buccinator and orbicularis oris and muscles of upper lip, 

4. Mandibular to muscles of lower lip 
5. Cervical to platysma. 

N.B.: As the branches of the facial nerve radiate outwards | 

across the face, incisions made in the face should be 

transverse & parallel to these branches in order to reduce 

the likelihood of cutting them. 

Fig. 4.45b: Facial nerve in the face 

LYMPH DRAINAGE (Fig. 4.46) 
1. Area medial to facial artery is drained by submandibular L.N. 

2. Area lateral to facial artery is drained by parotid L.N. 

3. Central part of lower lip & chin is drained by submental L.N. 

Fig. 4.46: Lymph drainage of the face 
ne 

MUSCLES OF FACIAL EXPRESSION (Fig. 4.47) 

General Rules: 
e They lie in subcutaneous layer; they arise from bones or subcutaneous tissue 

and are 

inserted in the skin. 

e They develop from mesoderm of 2" pharyngeal arch, so they are supplied b
y facial 

nerve. 

286 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

e They have 2 functions: 
1. Act as sphincters or dilators to the openings in the face (orbit, nose &mouth) 
2. Produce facial expressions. 

St — . = — 

Fig. 4.47: Muscles of Facial Expression 

Muscles of orbit and eye lids 
A) ORBICULARIS OCULI (Fig. 4.48a and b) 

e [tis the sphincter muscle of eyelids encircling the orbit 
e [t has 3 parts: 

1. Orbital part: arises from medial Palpebral ligament and adjacent bones (frontal 
process of maxilla and nasal process of frontal bone). It encircies the orbit 
without bony attachments laterally. 

2. Palpebral part: arises from medial Palpebral ligament and adjacent bones, it is 
inserted laterally in the lateral palpebral raphe. 

3. Lacrimal part: arises from lacrimal crest and lacrimal fascia; it is inserted in lateral 
palpebral raphe. 

ni — 

Fig.4.48: Orbicularis oculi 
e Actions: 

1. Orbital part: closes eye lids tightly for protection. 
2. Palpebral part: closes eye lids gently as in blinking & helps in spread of tears. 
3. Lacrimal part: dilates the lacrimal sac and helps in flow of tears. 

287 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, : CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Muscles of mouth and lips: 
A) BUCCINATOR: (Fig. 4. 49a and b) 

e Itis the muscle of the cheek it is covered by the buccopharyngeal fascia and buccal 

pad of fat. 
e Origin: 

- Upper fibers: from alveolar margin of maxilla opposite the 3 molars. 
- Lower fibers: from alveolar margin of mandible opposite the 3 molars. 

- Middle fibers: from pterygomandibular raphe which is a fibrous raphe 
connecting pterygoid hamulus and posterior end of mylohyoid line of 

mandible. 
e Insertion: 

- Upper fibers: into upper lip. 
V - Lower fibers: into lower lip. 
! - Middle fibers: decussate at the modiolus so that their upper part goes to the 

lower lip and their lower part goes to upper lip. 

Fig.4.49: Buccinator muscle 
eo Action: compresses the cheeks against the teeth preventing the accumulation of 

food in the vestibule of mouth. It is used in blowing, whistling and suckling. 

N.B.: Modiolus: is a fibromuscular palpable mass present just lateral to angle of mouth 

where muscle fibers converge towards or diverge away from angle of mouth 

B) ORBICULARIS ORIS (Fig.4.50) 
‘ -  Itis the sphincter of lips & is used in speech. aii 

- It consists of 4 quadrants upper, lower, right and left. Each 
8 quadrant consists of 2 parts: 

1. A large pars peripheralis. Fic 
2. A small pars marginalis. 

Thus, the muscle is formed of 8 segments. Each segment Pars | 

resembles a fan with its stem at modiolus radiating to a 

the dermis and submucosa of lips. It is used in speech 
Fig.4.50: Orbicularis oris muscle 

288 

eee ——————————— - A— — 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

TEMPORAL AND INFRATEMPQRAL FOSSAE 

Temporal Fossa: (Fig. 4.51) 

» Boundaries: 
1. Superiorly: Superior temporal line. 
2. Inferiorly: Zygomatic arch. 

> Contents: 
1. Temporalis muscle covered with the temporal fascia. 
2. Temporal fascia is attached superiorly to the superior temporal line and inferiorly to 

the upper border of zygomatic arch. 

1. Superior temporal line 
2. Lateral pterygoid plate 
3. Posterior surface of maxilla 
4, Styloid process 

. Greater wing of sphenoid 

Fig. 4.51: Boundaries of temporal and infratemporal fossae 

Infratemporal Fossa: 
> Boundaries: (Fig. 4.51) 

1. Laterally: Ramus of mandible. 
Medially: Lateral pterygoid plate. 
Anteriorly: Posterior surface of maxilla. 
Posteriorly: Styloid process. 
Superiorly: Greater wing of sphenoid. 

289 

$1 de 48 NM 

La aR 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Inf. orbital fissure 
(to orbit) 

Pterygomaxillary fissure 
(to pterygopalatine fossa) 

Fig. 4.52: Some communications of infratemporal fossa 

>» Communications: (Fig. 4.52) 
1. Superiorly: 

A. With temporal fossa through the gap deep to zygomatic arch. 
B. With middle cranial fossa through foramen ovale & foramen spinosum. 

2. Anteriorly: with the orbit through the inferior orbital fissure. 
3. Medially: with pterygopalatine fossa through pterygo-maxillary fissure. 

>» Contents: (Fig. 4.53.) 
e Superficial Contents: 

1. Lateral and medial 
pterygoid muscles. 

2. Branches of 
mandibular nerve. 

3. Maxillary artery. 
4. Pterygoid venous Lateral 

plexus. pterygoid 

e Deep contents: Maxillary a. 

1. Trunk of Pterygold pis. 

mandibular nerve Medial 

& otic ganglion. plyEed 
2. Tensor palate 

muscle. 
3. Middle & a Inferior alveolar n. 

accessory Sphenomandibular 
meningeal arteries 

4. Chorda tympani nerve. Fig. 4.53: Contents of infratemporal region 

5. Spheno-mandibular ligament. 

290 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Musofc Malsticeatison:  (Fig. 4.54) 
A) General notes: 

> Include 4 muscles: temporalis, masseter, lateral pterygoid and medial pterygoid. 
> They are developed from the mesoderm of the first pharyngeal arch, thus they are 

supplied by the mandibular nerve 
> They arise from the skull and insert into the mandible &act on the T/M joint 
> Temporalis lies in temporal fossa; masseter overlies ramus of mandible; medial & 

lateral pterygoids are contents of infratemporal fossa 

B) Attachments & nerve supply: 

Muscle ~ Origin Insertion Nerve supply 

All aspects of 
coronoid process of Two deep temporal 
mandible {except 

Floor of temporal fossa & Nerves 
: lateral aspect) 

| Temporalis | deep surface of temporal (from the 
extending on the . 3 tg 

fascia. ; anterior division of 
| anterior border of : 

. Mandibular nerve) 
ramus down till last 
molar. 

Superficial head: (larger): 
f L] 

rom anterior 2/3 of lower Masssiaric braioh 
border of zygomatic arch. : 

Lateral surface of (from anterior 
Masseter | Deep head: (smaller) from i 

, ramus of mandible. division of 
posteriorl/3 of lower Mandibular nerve) 

{ border & inner surface of 
zygomatic arch. 

Upper head (smaller); -Fovea in the front 
Infratemporal crest & : 

of neck of Pterygoid branch 
infratemporal surface of : 

Lateral : : mandible. (from anterior 
pterygoid greater LH So ana -Capsule and division of 

lagi Lower head larger]: articular disc of Mandibular nerve) 
ais Lateral surface of lateral 

TMJ 
pterygoid plate 

Superficial head 
| (Smaller): Tuberosity of 
Medial maxilla. Medial surface of A brian ihe 

pterygoid | Deep head (larger): angle of mandible. 
Mandibular nerve. 

Medial surface of lateral 
pterygoid plate. 

291 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Temporalis 

_ SEE Temporalis 
ny \ . 

8) a 
tendon Pe — y Zygomatic 

‘A : | NN arch 

'n (.) Coronoid 
ali F

i I 
} h
 t Aksic— Masse

pr t
o e
c r
e  
ss R20 

Lateral 
pterygoid 
upper head Medial 
Latepal 

pterygoid 
pterygoid Deep head 
lower head 

Medial 
pterygoid 
Superficial 

head 

Fig. 4.54: Muscles of mastication 

C) Actions: 
1. Temporalis: 

a) Its anterior vertical fibers are strong elevator of the mandible (antigravity muscle). 
b) Its posterior horizontal fibers retract the mandible (only retractor of mandible). 

2. Masseter: 
a) Its deep vertical fibers elevate the mandible (antigravity muscle). 

y b) Its superficial oblique fibers protrude the mandible. 
3. Medial pterygoid: 

a) Elevates the mandible. 
b) Helps lateral pterygoid to protrude the mandible. 
c) Medial and lateral pterygoid of one side acting together push mandible to the 

opposite side & when acting alternatively with muscles of the opposite side, they 
produce side to side chewing movement. 

4. Lateral pterygoid: 
a) Depresses the mandible to open the mouth. 
b) Protrudes the mandible. 
c) Side to side movement (see medial pterygoid). 

292 

=ta 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Temporomandibular Joint (TMJ): 
Type: Synovial - condylar. 
» Articulating bones:{ Fig: 4. 55) 

1- Head of mandible articulates with mandibular fossa & articular tubercle. 
2- Articular surfaces are covered by fibrocartilage. 

» Capsule: It is attached to margins of articular surfaces. 
» Synovial membrane: Lines the fibrous capsule. 
» Articular disc: 

1. It is formed of fibrocartilage 
2. Its upper surface is concavo-convex (to fit the articular eminence & mandibular fossa), 

while its lower surface is concave (to fit the head of mandible).. 
It divides the joint cavity into upper and lower compartments. 

4. Its circumference is attached to: 
a. The fibrous capsule. 
b. Tendon of lateral pterygoid muscle. 

Mandibular Fossa 

Articular 
Tubercle / Articular Disk 

Mandibular head 
Fig. 4.55: Articulating bones ot TMJ 

» Ligaments: (Fig. 4.56) 
1. Lateral (Temporo-mandibular) ligament: 

a. It lies lateral to the fibrous capsule. 
b. Is attached above to the tubercle on root of zygomatic process and below to lateral 

surface of neck of mandible. 
c. It limits posterior movement of mandible; thus, protecting the external auditory 

meatus and preventing posterior dislocation of head of mandible. 

2. Stylo-mandibular ligament: 
a. It lies posterior to fibrous capsule. 
b. Extends from apex of styloid process to angle of mandible. 
c. It is a condensation of the investing layer of deep cervical fascia that separates 

parotid from submandibular salivary gland. 

3. Spheno-mandibular ligament: 
a. It lies medial to joint. 
b. Extends from spine of sphenoid to lingula of mandibular foramen. 
c. lt is an embryological remnant of the first pharyngeal arch. 

293 

a 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

| Joint Capsule 

Fi Lateral ligament 

BB sphenomandibular ligament 

ll stylomandibular ligament 

Fig. 4.56: Ligaments of TMJ 

>» Movements: 
At rest the 2 jaws are separated by minimal interval, when the jaws are closed both teeth 

come into opposition (occlusal position). 

Y 1- Depression: 
- Lateral pterygoid pulls the head of mandible and the disc forwards causing depression 

of the mandible (by a hinge like movement). 
- Assisted by action of digastric, geniohyoid + mylohyoid & also simply by the effect of 

gravity. 

2- Elevation: 
- In which the reverse of depression occurs 
- Performed by temporalis, masseter and medial pterygoid muscles. 

3- Protrusion: 
- In which the head of mandible and disc move forwards and the lower teeth are thus 

drawn forwards. 
- Done by both lateral & medial pterygoid + superficial fibers of masseter. 

4- Retraction: 
- Done by posterior fibers of temporalis. 

5- Side to side movements {chewing movements): 
. Performed by medial and lateral pterygoids of one side acting alternatively with the 

muscles of the other side. 
- When medial and lateral pterygoids of one side contract, they push the chin to the 

opposite side. 

> Blood supply: Superficial temporal artery & maxillary artery. 
» Nerve supply: Auriculotemporal & masseteric nerves. 

Applied anatomy: Dislocation of the joint occurs mostly in an anterior direction because: 

1. TM lies just in front of the external auditory meatus. 

2. The lateral temporomandibular ligament prevents backward dislocation of the joint, 

thereby protecting the external auditory meatus. 

294 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

TTRIGEMINAL NERVE 
MANDIBULAR & MAXILLARY NERVES 

Trigeminal Nerve: (Fig. 4.57) 

A) General notes: 
> It is the 5" and largest cranial nerve. 
» It is a mixed nerve carrying sensory and motor fibers. 
» lt is sensory to skin of scalp, face (except skin over angle of mandible). Also, teeth, oral 

and nasal cavities 
» It is motor to the 4 muscles of mastication + mylohyoid, anterior belly of digastric, 

tensor palate & tensor tympani. 
Motor  ] 
nucleus 

Main : 
Opthaimic 

—— {V1 sensory) 

nucleus 
Maxillary 

Semilunar/ I ii 
trigeminal — Lf 

" T | - 

ganglion Ma, = n 

Spinal— = 
nucleus 

Mandibular 
(V3 sensory & motor) 

Fig. 4.57: Trigeminal nerve 
B) Roots of Trigeminal Nerve: 

» It has 2 roots: A small motor root and a large sensory root, both are attached to the 
ventral surface of pons. 
* Sensory root fibers: are axons (central processes) of pseudounipolar cells of the 

trigeminal ganglion. Peripheral processes of these cells will form the 3 divisions of 
trigeminal nerve: ophthalmic nerve, maxillary nerve & mandibular nerve. 

** Motor root: arises from motor nucleus of trigeminal, passes beneath the trigeminal 
ganglia to be distributed with mandibular nerve. 

C) Mandibular Nerve: (Fig. 4.58) 
Type: mixed sensory & motor. 

* Size: the largest branch of trigeminal nerve. 
* Intracranial course: It starts in the middle cranial fossa, has 2 roots: large sensory & 

small motor roots, both pass through foramen ovale below which they unite to form 
trunk of mandibular nerve 

%* Extracranial course: The nerve trunk enters the infratemporal fossa where it is 
related to: 
v' Medially: tensor palati m.& otic ganglion, 
v' Laterally: lateral pterygoid m. 
v' Posteriorly: middle meningeal a. 

295 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA mid ep oe tte eet enfin Cpe 

Nerve to medial pterygoid 
Trigeminal ganglion Otic ganglion 

Sensory mot —— Tensor tympani 

Motor root Tensor palati 

Medial pterygoid 
Nervus spinosus 

Massezeric nerve 

Auriculotemporal nerve Deep temporal nerves 

Buccal nerve 
Middle meningeal artery" 

Lingual nerve — Nerve to lateral pterygoid 

Chorda tympani nerve 

inferior alveolar nerve - Submandibular duct 

Mylohyoid nerve Incisive branch 

Fy 

Nerve to mylohyoid muscle —— | Mental nerve 

Nerve to anterior belly of digastric muscle 

Fig. 4.58: Mandibular nerve 
Branches: 
1) From the trunk: (one sensory + one motor) 

a. Sensory meningeal (nervous spinosus): passes with middle meningeal a. via 
foramen spinosum to supply dura of middle cranial fossa. 

b. Nerve to medial pterygoid: supplies medial pterygoid and sends a branch that 

passes to otic ganglia without relay to supply tensor palati and tensor tympani 
muscles. 

c. Anterior & posterior divisions. 
2) Branches of anterior division: (3 motor + one sensory nerves) 

a. 2 deep temporal nerves: appear at upper border of lateral pterygoid m., ascend 

to temporal fossa & enter the deep surface of temporalis m. 

b. Masseteric nerve: appears at upper border of lateral pterygoid m. & passes 

through. 
the mandibular notch to enter the deep surface of masseter m. 

¢. Nerve to lateral pterygoid m.: enters the deep surface of the muscle. 
d. Buccal nerve: is the only sensory nerve of the anterior division, emerges between 

the 2 heads of lateral pterygoid m. then runs on the buccinator & pierces it 

without supplying it. It supplies skin & mucosa of the cheek. 
3) Branches of posterior division: (2 sensory + one mixed). 

. Auriculotemporal nerve. (Sensory) 
Lingual nerve. (Sensory) 
Inferior alveolar nerve. (Mixed) 

. Auriculotemporal Nerve 
= Arises by 2 roots which run backwards encircling the middle meningeal artery 

then reunite to form one trunk that continues backward between spheno- 

mandibular ligament & neck of mandible above maxillary artery. 
» Ascends upwards deep to parotid gland, behind superficial temporal vessels. 

296 

OQ 0 OQ 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

= Branches: 
i. Auricular branch: to the skin of upper 2/3 of auricle, external auditory 

meatus & outer surface of the tympanic membrane. 
ii. Temporal branch: to the skin of the temporal region. 
iii. Glandular branches: to parotid gland. 
iv. Articular branch: to temporomandibular joint. 

b. Linqual Nerve 
- It arises deep to lateral pterygoid m. where it is joined by the chorda tympani 
nerve. 

- It appears at lower border of lateral pterygoid, passes downwards between 
mandible & medial pterygoid m. (pterygo-mandibular space), anterior to 
inferior alveolar nerve. | 

- It enters the floor of mouth on the medial side of the root of the 3rd molar | 
tooth where it is in direct contact with the mandible covered only by gum 
mucosa 
(Being superficial, the lingual nerve is liable to injury during extraction of lower 
last molar hence it is considered a dangerous site). 

- In the floor of mouth, it crosses styloglossus, hyoglossus and genioglossus. On 
hyoglossus, the submandibular ganglion hangs from it. Then it hooks around 
the submandibular duct from lateral to medial. 

- Distribution: 
i. Ganglionic branches: to the submandibular ganglion. 

ii. Sensory branches: to anterior 2/3 of tongue, floor of mouth and lingual 
aspect of gingiva. 

iii. Carry taste sensation from anterior 2/3 of tongue via chorda tympani. 
iv. Carry postganglionic parasympathetic to submandibular & sublingual 

salivary glands via chorda tympani. 

¢. Inferior alveolar nerve 
- The largest & the only mixed branch {motor & sensory). 
- [t appears at the lower border of lateral pterygoid m. then passes vertically 
between ramus of mandible & medial pterygoid m. to enter mandibular 
foramen & mandibular canal. 

- It exits from mental foramen as mental nerve. 

- Branches: 
a) Mylohyoid branch: Contains all motor fibers of the posterior division, arises 

just before the nerve enters the mandibular foramen, pierces the 
sphenomandibular ligament & runs in the mylohyoid groove to supply 
mylohyoid & anterior belly of digastric muscles. 

b) Mental nerve: passes through mental foramen to supply skin of chin & 
lower lip. 

c) Incisive nerve: to supply the lower canine and incisors teeth. 
D) Maxillary Nerve: {Figure 4.59) 
» Origin: Trigeminal nerve 
» Type: purely sensory nerve 
» Size: smaller than mandibular 

297 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

> Intracranial course: -Starts in the middle cranial fossa, runs forward in the lateral wall 

of cavernous sinus below ophthalmic n & leaves skull through foramen rotundum. 

>» Extracranial course: 
1. It enters the pterygopalatine fossa (related to pterygopalatine ganglion & 3 part 

of maxillary a) 
2. Leaves the pterygopalatine fossa via pterygo-maxillary fissure => infra-temporal 

fossa = infraorbital fissure here, it is called infraorbital nerve => infraorbital 

groove, canal & foramen -> face. 
» Branches: 

1. In the cranial cavity: Meningeal nerve to supply dura of middle cranial fossa. 
2. In the pterygopalatine fossa 

a. Two ganglionic branches: carry sensory fibers to the ganglion. 
b. Zygomatic nerve: passes to the orbit via inferior orbital fissure where it divides 

into 2 branches: 
i. Zygomatico-facial n., passes via its foramen to skin over zygomatic bone. 

ii. Zygomatico-temporal n., communicates with lacrimal nerve carrying with it 

the Parasympathetic supply to the lacrimal gland then passes via its foramen 
to supply skin of the non-hairy part of temporal region. 

¢c. Posterior superior alveolar n.: passes via pterygo-maxillary fissure to enter 

multiple foramina in the posterior surface of maxilla to supply mucosa of 
maxillary air sinus & upper 3 molars. 

_Infraorbital nerve 
. Zygomatic nerve Fa Ll - " 

= s Fey ( In infraerbital 
4 

ee 
a { grooveand canal) 

MAXILLARY NERVE 

Cavernous 
sinus ¥ Infraorbital 

Foramen A 
rotundum Pierygopaiatine V3) 

Pterygopalatine 
ganglion 

Superior alveolar nerves 
{ Posterior, middle and 
anterior) 

Fig. 4.59: Maxillary nerve 

298 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

3. Branches of the infra- orbital nerve: 
a. Middle superior alveolar n., arises in infra-orbital groove, and descends in the 

lateral wall of maxilla and supply upper 2 premolar teeth & gums. This nerve 
might be absent 

b. Anterior superior alveolar n., arises in the infra-orbital canal descends in the 
anterior wall of maxilla to supply upper 2 incisors and canine teeth. N.B: The 
Posterior, middle and anterior superior alveolar nerves share in the formation 
of superior dental plexus. 

¢. Terminal branches in the face: inciuding 
i. Palpebral (to the lower eyelid). 
ii. Nasal (to the ala of nose). 
iii. Labial (to the upper lip). 

4. Branches of pterygo palatine ganglion: are considered branches of maxillary nerve. 

Pterygopalatine Fossa (Fig. 4.60) 

» It is a small inverted pyramidal space found medial to pterygo-maxillary fissure. 
» Boundaries: 

1. Anterior wall: Posterior surface of maxilla. 
2. Posterior wall: Pterygoid process 
3. Medial wall: Vertical plate of palatine bone. 
4. laterally: it opens into infratemporal fossa through pterygomaxillary fissure. 

» Contents: 
1. 3" Part of maxillary artery and its branches & accompanying veins. 
2. Maxillary nerve. 
3. Pterygopalatine ganglion and its branches 

= Eis = . mR a = i Ea am oy 

pol J UI phe, Sade Se F 4 Bi 
5 Lg PE pd &, F pl ye 

§ er fy g IS i

Infratemporal f Nasal 
fossa 1 2 cavity 

\ / 

1 Pterygomaxillary fissure 

2 Pterygopalatine fossa 

3 Sphenopalatine foramen 
Fig. 4.60: Pterygopalatine fossa 

299 

WM p= 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

» Communications (Fig. 4.61) 
1. With the infratemporal fossa via pterygomaxillary fissure (transmitting maxillary 

artery). 
2. With the middle cranial fossa via foramen rotundum (transmitting maxillary nerve). 

3. With the nose via sphenopalatine foramen (transmitting nasopalatine nerve and other 
nasal branches of pterygopalatine ganglion). 

4. With the orbit via inferior orbital fissure (transmitting zygomatic nerve and infraorbital 

nerve and vessels). 
5. With the pterygoid canal (transmitting nerve of pterygoid canal). 
6. With the pharynx via palatino-vaginal canal (transmitting pharyngeal branch of 

maxillary artery & pharyngeal branch of pterygopalatine ganglia). 
7. With the palate via greater & lesser palatine foramina (transmitting greater and lesser 

palatine nerves & vessels respectively). 

Pharyngeal canal Sphenopalatine foramen 
Nasopharynx Nasal cavity 

Foramen rotundum 
Middle cranial fossa 

Inferior orbital 
fissure 

. Floor of orbit 
Pterygoid canal 
Basc of the skull 

= 

Pterygomaxillary fissure 
: ih 

Infratemporal fossa 

Greater palatine canal iy Ng 4 3 i} 

Oral cavity (palate) 
VAY, 

Fig. 4.61: Communications of pterygopalatine fossa 

Vessels in the infrate ral fossa: 

A. Maxillary Artery (Fig. 4.62) 
> Origin: 1 of 2 terminal branches of ECA, it begins inside parotid gland at the level of 

neck of mandible 
> Course & relations: it is divided into3 parts by means of lateral pterygoid muscle 

1) The 1st part (Mandibular part): runs horizontally between the neck of mandible & 

sphenomandibular ligament below auriculotemporal nerve, to reach the lower 

border of lateral pterygoid. 

2) The 2™ part (Pterygoid part): runs upward & forward either superficial or deep to 
the lateral surface of lateral pterygoid muscle. 

3)The 3 part (Pterygopalatine part): passes between the 2 heads of lateral pterygoid, 

enters the pterygopalatine fossa via pterygomaxillary fissure. 

300 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

1} 3" part of Maxillary A | 
8 

2 part of Maxillary A | 
; 1* part of Maxillary A | 

Upper head of lateral 
Pterygold Muscle Neck of mandible (cut) 

Lower head of lateral___-4+—7 1 ¥00 IEG = A 1 Maxillary Artery| 
xternal carotid artery 

Fig. 4.62. Course and relations of maxillary artery 

> Branches (Fig.4.63): 
- The 1% part gives 5 branches, all pass to bony foramina. 
- The 2" part gives 4 branches, supply muscles of mastication. 
- The 3" part gives 6 branches; all pass via bony foramina related to pterygo 

palatine fossa. 

Branches of middie 
meningeal in cranial cavity 

Maxillary artery 

Deep temporal arteries 

Upper head of Superficial temporal artery 

tora) pterygoid (our) Middle meningeal artery 

Pterygopalatine fossa ; Auriculotemporal nerve 
Lower phteearydg oofi dl a(tceurta)l  M— e ol Pterygold artery 

Buccal artery Artery 10 masseter 

SEI Inferior alveolar artery 

Menta! artery it, a: ’ «5. 
Sage. 

Fig. 4.63: Branches of maxillary artery 

301 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

B. Pterygoid plexus of veins: (Fig. 4.64) 
» It is a venous network that surrounds lateral pterygoid muscle. 
» Tributaries: It receives veins that correspond to the branches of maxillary artery. 
» Drainage: Its posterior end is drained by maxillary vein, which unites with superficial 

temporal vein to form the retro-mandibular vein. 
» Communications: 

1. With the facial vein via the deep facial vein. 
2. With cavernous sinus via emissary veins that pass-through foramen ovale, emissary 

sphenoidal foramen & foramen lacerum. 
3. With the inferior ophthalmic vein via a vein that passes through inferior orbital 

fissure. 
. a—— 
Cavernous Emissary veins connecting 
|v enous sinus | pterygold venous plexus to 

cavernous sinus 

Slat [Lad 
ry, 

| A 

a f ) Sp i Superficial 
Inferior U _-— Js 2 temporal vein 
ophthalamic vel \ igh 

[ F 

| 
ne 

- Pterypoid 
venous plexus 

Retromandibular 

Facial —— ee 
‘vein 
pn External jugular vein 

Internal jugular vein 

Fig. 4.64: Pterygoid venous plexus 

303 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

Autonomic Ganglia 

There are four ganglia suspended from the 3 divisions of the trigeminal nerve. They are otic, 

submandibular, pterygopalatine and ciliary ganglia. 

i sion (Fig. 4.65) 
Site: Immediately below foramen ovale, deep to mandibular n. 

) Sympathetic root: Plexus around middle meningeal a. 
» Para- sympathetic root: Inferior salivatory nucleus - tympanic branch of 9thn. = 

tympanic plexus => lesser petrosal n. that passes in foramen ovale -> otic ganglion. 

> Distribution: Postganglionic fibers to parotid gland via auriculotemporal n. 

J Parasympathetic fibers 
IT Sympathetic Fibers 

Inferior salivatory [ | Sensory fibers 
| Tympanic Plexus 

RUCRYS ~~ ‘Tympanic 
> »X | | Lesser petrosal nerve 

iv i " | — Mandibular nerve 

Glossopharyngeal “§ | Foreman 
nerve ovale 

Jugular 
foramen 

Superior cervical + 5 Auriculortemponerravle 
ganglion 8 i 

T1 spinal | 1B 
segment | * Parotid gland 

Fig. 4.65: Otic ganglion 

2. Submandibular ganglion: (Fig. 4.66) 
Site: Suspended from lingual n. on lateral surface of hyoglossus m. 
Sensory root: Lingual n. 
Sympathetic root: Plexus around facial a. 
Para- sympathetic root: Superior salivatory nucleus = nervus intermedius of facial n. 

- chorda tympani that unites with lingual nerve. 
Distribution: Postganglionic fibers to submandibular gland directly & to sublingual 
gland via rejoining lingual n. 

304 

V VV VV 



CHAPTER IV BRAIN STEM, CRANIAL CAVITY, TEMPORAL REGION AND PTERYGOPALATINE FOSSA 

4 
Solitary nucleus 

Sup. salivatory nucleus 4 Nervus intermedius 

Facial nerve —\_. — 

KO 
postganglionic parasym. to 

sublingual gland 
Sympathetic root via 

plexus around facial artery 
LY ®. == w ganglion 

M4T%O R: 0° (| stganglionico nic parasp;ar asym. to 
submandibular gland 

oo Submandibular gland 
Facial a. Nseglossus 

Fig 4.66: submandibular ganglion 

3. Sphenopalatine ganglion: (Fig. 4. 67) 
Site: Suspended from maxillary n. in pterygopalatine fossa. 
Sensory root: Maxillary nerve. 
Sympathetic root: Plexus around /CA {deep petrosal n.) 
Para- sympathetic root: Superior salivatory nucleus & special lacrimatory nucleus=> 
nervus intermedius of facial n.-> greater petrosal n. that unites with deep petrosal n. to 
form nerve of pterygoid canal. 

> Distribution: Postganglionic fibers to: 
1. Orbital perioesteum (sensory only). 
2. Lacrimal gland. 
3. Mucous glands in nose, palate & nasopharynx. 

Soli: tary nucleus Nervus intermedia Masillory ~~ Lacimal \o t gland 
Ng Nerve of the 

ptervgoid canal a
L Lacrimatorv nucleus - >, ) ' 
i Postganglionic to 

lacrimal gland 

Facial red 
Zvgomaticotemporal 

Fig. 4.67: pterygopalatine ganglion 

4. Ciliary ganglion: Will be studied with the orbit 

305 

VVVY 



CHAPTER V 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

CHAPTER V: ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs): 

By the end of this chapter the student should be able to: 

e Describe the division and attachement of fascia of the neck. 
e List boundaries, floor, subdivisions and contents of anterior and posterior 

triangles of the neck. 
e¢ Describe attachment, action and nerve supply of sternomastoid. | 
oe Describe attachment, action and nerve supply of suprahyoid and infrahyoid 

muscles. 
e List nerves forming and branches of cervical plexus. 
e List the site of sympathetic chain and communications of its ganglia. 
oe Discuss the course and branches of last four cranial nerves and predict the 

effect of their lesion. 

307 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

FASCIA OF THE NECK 

0 Skin; of the neck is supplied by cutaneous branches of the cervical plexus. 
0 Superficial Fascia: (Fig. 5.1) Contains platysma, which arises from the fascia covering the 

chest and ascends to the face. It is supplied by the facial nerve (cervical branch). it is one 

of the muscles of facial expression and can express sadness, horror by drawing the corners 

of mouth inferiorly. 
» Superficial Veins: 
< External jugular vein: Formed by union of posterior auricular vein and posterior 

division of retromandibular vein. It descends superficial to sternocleidomastoid and 

pierces the deep fascia in the lower part of the posterior triangle to drain into the 

subclavian vein. 
eo Tributaries: 

1. Anterior jugular vein. 
2. Transverse cervical vein. 
3. Suprascapular vein. 
4, Posterior external jugular vein. 

Pectoral lnacia Juguias venous serch Stamoc! isidomasmiuoscklde 
yor of 

Fig. 5.1: Superficial dissection of the neck 

Remember: 
% Superficial cervical lymph nodes accompany the oXtorPal jugular vein 
< This vein serves as venous manometer. It is either invisible or observable for only a 

short distance superior to the clavicle if the venous pressure is within the normal range. 

308 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

However, if this pressure rises (as in heart failure or in singers) the vein becomes 
prominent throughout its course along the side of neck. 
* Anterior Jugular Vein: Begins below the chin and descends one on each side of the 

anterior median plane of neck. Just above the suprasternal notch, the right and left 
veins are united by the jugular arch. Each vein then turns laterally deep to the 
sternocleidomastoid muscle to drain into the external jugular vein. 

» Deep Fascia: (Fig. 5.2) Lies beneath platysma muscie and supports muscles, vessels, 
and nerves of neck. It is condensed to form the following four layers: 
1. investing layer. 
2. Pretracheal layer. 
3. Prevertebral layer. | 
4. Carotid sheath. 

infrahyoid muscles: 

4=  rr 

Nuchal Sgament 

Fig. 5.2: T.S in the neck showing the arrangement of the deep fascia 

1. Investing Layerof  D ervical Fascia; 
» The outer layer surrounds the neck like a collar, lies immediately deep to the 

platysma. 
» |t forms the roof of anterior and posterior triangles of neck. 
> It splits to invest sternocleidomastoid and trapezius muscles, in addition to 

investing parotid and submandibular glands and thickens to form the 
stylomandibular ligament between the two glands. 

2. The prevertebral fascia: represents the 2nd layer (lies in front of the floor of 
posterior triangle of the neck). 

309 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

Sternocleidomastoid muscle 

*Origin: (Fig. 5.4) 
1- Sternal head: superolateral aspect of anterior surface of manubrium. 
2- Clavicular head: medial 1/3 of the upper surface of clavicle. 

*Insertion: 
1- Mastoid process. 
2- Lateral 1/3 of superior nuchal line. 

*Nerve supply: 
1- Motor: spinal accessory nerve. 
2- Sensory: ventral rami of C 2&3 (proprioceptive). 

Superior 
nuchal line 

— 
¥ 43 ON : 

Mastoid process 7, A RA 

— Sternocleidomastoid 
Muscle | 

Sternal head 
Origin 

Clavicular head 

Fig. 5.4: Sternocleidomastoid muscle 
*Relations: (Fig. 5.5) 
The muscle is covered by: 

1- Skin & Superficial fascia containing (platysma, EJV, 3 nerves "great auricular, transverse 
cervical, medial supraclavicular” & superficial cervical L.N.) 

2- Deep fascia. 
*Actions: 

1- If acts (at one side), tilting the head to its own side &rotates it to make the face turned 
to the opposite side. 

2- If acts (at both sides), flex the head anteriorly (forward). 
3- They can act from above during forced inspiration. 

Lesser occipital n. 

External jugular vein 

Great auricular n. 
Transverse nerve of neck 

Supraclavicular n. 
Anterior jugular vein 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

TRIANGLES OF THE NECK 

The anterolateral part of the neck is divided by means of the sternocleidomastoid muscle 

into two triangles: anterior and posterior. 

Posterior Triangle 
*Sjte: A triangular space on the side of the neck situated behind the sternomastoid muscle. 

*Boundaries: (Fig. 5.6) 
- Anterior: Posterior border of sternomastoid. 
- Base (Inferiorly): Middle 1/3 of clavicle. 
- Apex: Lies superiorly, where trapezius and sternomastoid meet. 

- Roof: formed of skin, superficial fascia containing (platysma, external jugular vein and 

cutaneous branches of cervical plexus & deep fascia (investing layer of deep cervical 

fascia). 
- Floor: formed by the prevertebral layer of the deep cervical fascia, covering the following 
muscles (from above downwards): (Fig. 5.6) 

1) Semispinalis capitis (inconstant). 
2) Splenius capitis. 
3) Levator scapulae. 
4) Scalenus medius. 
5) Scalenus anterior (hidden behind sternocleidomastoid). 

Bl Sternocleidomastoid 
Hl Splenius capitis 
[] Levator scapulae 
J Anterior scalene 
Bl Middle scalene 
Bl Trapezius 

NAAT 5 $= \ 
di 

Fig. 5.6: Boun aries a nd floor of the posterior triangle 

312



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

*Divisions: Subdivided by the inferior belly of omohyoid m. into: (Fig. 5.7) 
a) Larger upper part called occipital triangle. 
b) Smaller lower part called supraclavicular triangle. 

fr > We 

IA Li 438) 
fis 7 

if pr a 

TI J ’ I} 

[5 § 
HH{i  ; 

/ Occipital 

Omohyoid //  triangle 

(superior belly) / 

Subclavian WL SE i Omohyoid 
triangle ~PIT PEaa, Gi (inferior belly) 

*Contents: 
A) Nerves: 

1- Spinal part of accessory nerve. 
2- Roots and trunks of brachial plexus. 
3- Cutaneous nerves of cervical plexus. 
4- Muscular branches to the muscles of floor & boundaries. 

B) Vessels: 
1- 3rd part of subclavian artery. 
2- Subclavian vein. 
3- Suprascapular artery and vein. 
4- Transverse cervical artery and vein. 
5- External jugular vein {in superficial contents). 
6- Occipital artery. 

C) Others: 
1- Omohyoid muscle. 
2- Lymph nodes. 

*Details of the contents: Rh 

(1) External jugular vein: (Fig. 5.8) \ 
- One of the superficial contents, formed 

superficial to the investing layer by the Post. ext} 
union of posterior division of the egy. \ : 
retromandibular vein with posterior berry _ witli 
auricular vein. Wow Bn [Tjugularv. 

- It crosses over sternomastoid & descends —— | 
vertically till a finger's breadth above Subclavianv. 
clavicle to pierce the deep fascia & end in Suprascapularv. ; T=, 

subclavian vein (its only tributary). i - 

| 
I 

- It receives (transverse cervical, 
suprascapular & anterior jugular veins). 

Fig. 5.8: Veins of the posterior 

313 

||  
| 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

5. 9) _—_— | \ Greatauricular n. 

- First appear at middle of posterior border of occipitain. \§ \ vat \ TWN 
sternomastoid m., then radiate in different | iE 1 
directions: 
1. Great auricular superiorly and anteriorly 

accessoryn. | IE Transverse 
2. Lesser occipital superiorly and posteriorly. 

supraclavicular nerves ! cervicaln 

3. Transverse cervical. 
4. Supraclavicular nerves inferiorly. 

Fig. 5.9: Cutaneous branches of the 
(3) Roots and trunks of brachial plexus: (Fig. 5.10): cervical plexus + spinal accessory nerve 

(Roots & Trunks of Brachial Plexus) WE TER 
First lie between scalenus anterior & medius (with the : 
subclavian artery), then pass down, so that the upper & 
middle trunks lie above the subclavian a. while the lower 
trunk is behind the artery till the clavicle. 

| Upper trunk 
Middle trunk 

—— Lower trunk 

\ 

\ h 

Fig. 5.10: Roots and trunks of brachial plexus 

pat o : (Fig. 5.11) Passes between the scalenus anterior 

and scalenus edius ms .-  then arches over scalenus medius to reach the outer border of 
1% rib. 
- It is separated from the subclavian vein by scalenus anterior muscle. 
- In 35% of subjects it gives no branches, while in 65% gives the deep branch of 

transverse cervical. 

(5) The Subclavian vein: (Fig. 5.8) it is the continuation of axillary vein at the outer border of 
1% rib. It lies in front of scalenus anterior, and then continues to run with 3 & 1° parts of 
the artery. It receives one tributary (external jugular vein). 

(6) The suprascapular & transverse cervical arteries: (Fig. 5.11) 
a- Both are branches of the thyrocervical trunk that arise from 1% part of subclavian 

artery, then pass in front of scalenus anterior & the subclavian artery across the 
posterior triangle. 

b- The transverse cervical passes deep to trapezius to end in superficial and deep 
branches. 

(7) Lymph nodes: (lie along the posterior border of sternomastoid): 

314 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

a- More in the lower part to the supraclavicular nodes. 
b- Few at the upper angle to the occipital nodes draining posterior % of the scalp. 

\% 

i 

Occipital a. ° 

| . Transverse 

cervical a. 

~~ | Suprascapulara. 

i 4 Thyrocervical trunk 

J .— Subclavian a. 

\ 

\ | 

Fig. 5.11: Arteries of posterior triangle 

ANTERIOR TRIANGLE 

*Definition: A large triangular space on each side of the neck situated in front of 
sternomastoid muscle. 

*Boundaries: (Fig. 5.12) 
- Anteriorly: Anterior median line of 
neck. 

- Posteriorly: Anterior border of 
sternomastoid. 

- Superiorly: Inferior border of 
mandible and a line joining angle of Middle line 

mandible to mastoid process. of the neck 

Fig. 5.12: Boundaries of the anterior triangle 

315 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

*Division: (Fig. 5.13) divided by hyoid bone & 3 muscles attached to it (2 digastric + superior 

belly of omohyoid) into 3% triangles on each side. 
1. Digastric triangle 

Stylohyoid 
2. Carotid triangle 

Ant.&post. bellies 
3. Muscular triangle 

of digastric nm 
4. Half submental triangle. 

N._ Submental triangle 
& Hyoid bone 

Sup.&inf. bellies 
Fy nar4  of omohyoid m. 
\ 

» 

2, 
p- . \ sa . 

D= digastric triangle, C= carotid triangle, M= muscular triangle 

Fig. 5.13: Divisions of the anterior triangle 

1) Submental Triangle: (Fig. 5.14) 

*Definition: A median triangle, formed by the meeting of the two anterior triangles 

superiorly, between the chin and the hyoid bone. 
Boundaries: 

- Base: Body of hyoid bone. 
- Apex: Symphysis menti. Mandible 

- On each side: Anterior belly of digastric. 
N.B.: Half of the Submental triangle is bounded anteriorly 
by median plane, on the side by anterior belly of digastric 
and below by hyoid bone. 

- Floor: Two mylohyoid muscles, with their median 

raphe. 
*Contents: 

1) Submental lymph nodes. 
2) Submental artery and vein. 
3) Small veins, those unite to form the anterior jugular vein. 
4) Mylohyoid nerve and vessels. 

Fig. 5.14: Submental triangle 

316



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

2] Digastric triangle: (Fig. 5.15) 

*Boundaries: 
- Anteriorly: Anterior belly of digastric 
muscle. stylohyoid SN 

- Posteriorly: Posterior belly of digastric and Tongue 

stylohyoid muscles. 
- Superiorly (base): Inferior border of 
mandible and a line drawn from angle of 
mandible to mastoid process. 

- Roof: -Skin, Superficial fascia, deep fascia, Post belly of : 

which splits to enclose the submandibular digastric AN o 
salivary gland. pr > ) 

- Floor: Myylloohnyyo id and HyYoOgBl ossus muscles. Fvoplossus (SUG Ant belly of 
lig digastric 

Mylohyoid 

*Contents: (Fig. 5.16) Fig. 5.15: Boundaries & floor of digastric triangle 
A- Anterior part of the triangle: 

1) Submandibular salivary gland with submandibular LN & facial vein superficial to it 
and facial artery deep to it. 

2) Structures superficial to mylohyoid 
muscle: submental vessels and 
mylohyoid nerve and vessels. 

3) Structures superficial to hyoglossus Faciala. and v. 
muscle: 
a) Lingual nerve. pe i 
b) Submandibular ganglion. Fmd A ARS 
¢) Submandibular duct. Vo Submandibular AS 
d) Submandibular gland (deep \ J ———— a 

LY 

e) Hypoglossal nerve. — 
B- Posterior part of the triangle: 

1) Lower part of the parotid gland. Internal Sp Submandibular 1.nodes 
2) External carotid artery. jugularv. Hypoglossal n. 

3) Carotid sheath with its contents: Vagus n. Common carotid a. 

a) Internal carotid artery. 
b) Internal jugular vein. Fig. 5.16: Contents of digastric triangle 

¢) Vagus nerve, 

317 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

3) Carotid triangle: (Fig. 5.17) 

*Boundaries: 
- Superiorly: Posterior belly of the digastric. 
- Anteriorly: Superior belly of omohyoid. eZa l Hyaglossus 
- Posteriorly: Anterior border of sternomastoid. Migaia} = Z Thyrohyoid 

- Roof: Skin, superficial fascia and investing layer of Inf. 

the deep cervical fascia. 
ho ) 

| ternomasto 
- Floor: 

- Anteriorly: Hyoglossus and thyrohyoid muscles. 
<< OU 

- Posteriorly: Middle and inferior constrictors of the ———— 

pharynx. Fig. 5.17: Boundaries & floor of 
carotid triangle 

*Contents: (Fig. 5.18) 
A) Arteries: 

1) Common carotid artery (CCA). 
2) Internal carotid artery (ICA) 
3) External carotid artery (EGA), with 5 of its branches: 

a) Superior thyroid artery. 
b) Ascending pharyngeal artery. 
c) Lingual artery. 
d) Facial artery. 
e) Occipital artery. 

- The carotid sinus lies at the termination of CCA and beginning of ICA, (a baro- 

receptor). 
- The carotid body lies posteriorly at the same site embedded in the adventitia of these 

vessels, (a chemoreceptor). 
B) Veins: Internal jugular vein (IJV), with 4 of its tributaries: 

a) Pharyngeal vein. b) Lingual vein. c) Common facial vein. d) Superior thyroid vein. 

C) Nerves: 
a) Last 3 cranial nerves: Vagus (10), Spinal accessory (11%) & Hypoglossal (12th). 
b) Ansa cervicalis, lies anterior to the sheath. 
d) Sympathetic chain runs vertically downwards posterior to the carotid sheath. 

D) Carotid sheath, with its vascular and nervous contents. 

E) Lymph Nodes: Deep cervical lymph nodes, situated along the JV. 

318 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

Common 
Occipital a. facial v 

Facials 

Linguala 

Int. “= Asc pharyng. 8 
arotid a. Sup. 

Ext. thyroid a 
carotida. Sup thyroid 

Common Thyroid 

carotid a. gland 
Int. jugular v. 

a) Arteries in carotid triangle b) Veins in carotid triangle 

LJ 
re 

4 
\ NZ] Hypoglossal n. 

q 
Ansa 

cervicalis 
"Vagus n. 

Spinal 
accessory 

¢) Nerves in carotid triangle a) Lymph nodes in carotid triangle 

Fig. 5.18: Contents of carotid triangle 

1) Muscular Triangle: (Fig. 5.13) 

*Boundaries: 
- Anteriorly: Anterior median line of neck. 
Postero-superiorly: Superior belly of omohyoid. 
Postero-inferiorly: Anterior border of sternomastoid. 
Roof: -Skin, superficial fascia & investing deep cervical fascia. 
Floor: Pre-tracheal fascia. 

*Contents: The infrahyoid muscles are the chief contents of the muscular triangle. 

319 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

Infrahyoid Muscles 

» Origin & insertion: (Fig. 5.19 a,b&c) : | 
Muscle | ~ Origin | Insertion 

OE 3) Back of manubrium 

of Sternohy oid | + medial end of the clavicle Hyoid hone 

| A Back of manubrium Oblique line of the thyroid 
Serothyrsia + back of the Ist costal cartilage cartilage. 

Thyrohyoid.. Oblique line of the thyroid vor bons 
ERE Thy cartilage 

Vie | Sup.belly: Hyoid bone Intermediate tendon held 
Omohyoid | Inf.belly: upper border of scapula | in position by a facial sling 

+suprascapular ligament connected to the clavicle 

» Nerve Supply: All infra-hyoid muscles are supplied by ansa cervicalis, except thyrohyoid 
muscle, which is supplied by Cifibers that accompany the hypoglossal nerve. 

= Actions: All infrahyoid muscles depress the larynx except thyrohyoid, which can elevate 
or depress the larynx. 
1- Sternohyoid: depresses hyoid bone after its elevation during swallowing and vocal 

movements. 
2- Sternothyroid: depresses larynx after its elevation in swallowing and vocal 

movements. 
3- Thyrohyoid: depresses hyoid bone + elevate larynx. 
4- Omohyoid: depresses hyoid in prolonged inspiratory efforts & tenses the lower deep 

cervical fascia. 
TRa =o L8 2 i al 

Thyroid cartilage 

= - Hn, =1 ” 

. : — 

EF 

a) Superficial muscles — lateral view b) Deep muscles — lateral view 

320 



CHAPTER YV ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

Omohyoid 
Thyrohyoid (Superior belly) 

Sternohyoid 
Is 

| EF 
ih| 

Sternothyroid —f= A 4 

Omohyoid 
(inferior belly) 

= 

i 

c) Anterior view 
Fig. 5.19: Infrahyoid Muscles 

SUPRAHYOID MUSCLES, CERVICAL PLEXUS AND SYMPATHETIC 
CHAIN 

Suprahyoid Muscles (Fig. 5.20) 

They are found in the submandibular region between mandible and hyoid bone. 

Muscle | ~~ Origin | Insertion | Nerve supply 

Si belly: Anterior belly: n. to 
Digastric fossa of the mylatweid {derivative of 

SY mandible Intermediate tendon which oS neal arch) 
 Digastric Posterior belly: is held to hyoid bone by a prarynd i 
MR TE ; . Posterior belly: Facial n. 
ke Re TE Digastric notch on fibrous loop — 

CH : (Derivative of 2nd 
Rois in medial surface of WI"

S Lk y mastoid process. pharyng F 

* Do CCE Hyoid bone 
ial is a Posterior surface of (where its tendon is Facial, 
Stylohyoid (derivative of 2 

os a styloid process perforated by the posterior A
belly of digastric m) pharyng 
Anterior & middie 

mytohyord raphe rom | Nerve to Myiohyoi 
oN Mylohyoid line of the Y Y PD (Derivative of 1st 
Mylohyoid ) symphysis menti to body of 

4 mandible. my pharyngeal 

| Posterior fibers into hyoid aren) 
bone. 

Inferior genial 
Geniohyoid | tubercle of body of Hyoid bone C1 via Hypoglossal n. 

| mandible 

321 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

Bl Geniohyoid 
Bl Mylohyoid 
_] Digastric 

Bl stylohyoid 

Hyoid Bone 

Fig. 5.20 a: Suprahyoid Muscles - Anterior view 

ul 

’ Sk Moe Stylohyoid 
-J 

\ SS a oS 

Mylohyoid J La Ss i Th 
Digastric 
(posterior belly) 

Digastric 
(anterior belly) 

TT Wh, 
SN 

Fig. 5.20 b: Suprahyoid Mu scles - Lateral view 

** Actions of suprahyoid muscles: 
1) Digastric: 

a. If the hyoid bone is fixed, it depresses the mandible (helping lateral pterygoid m.). 

b. Elevate hyoid bone during swallowing. 
2) Stylohyoid: pulls hyoid bone upward & backward. 
3) Mylohyoid m.: 

a. Elevates the floor of mouth during the early stage of swallowing. 
b. Helps in depression of the mandible (if the hyoid bone is fixed). 
c. Supports the floor of the mouth (called Diaphragma oris). 

4) Geniohyoid m.: Elevates hyoid bone or depresses the mandible (if the hyoid bone is fixed). 

322 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

Cervical Plexus (Fig.5.21) 
Q Construction: - formed by the ventral rami of upper 4 cervical nerves. 
Q Site of formation: between anterior & posterior tubercles of cervical transverse processes. 
O Relations: Lies between Scalenus medius posteriorly and prevertebral fascia anteriorly. 
Q How formed: each nerve is divided into upper & lower divisions which unite together to 

form 3 loops. 

Lesser occipital 
nerve 

C1 

Superior roootf V4 
ansa cervicalis <7 C2 

Transverse d Great auricular 
cervical a / C3 nerve 

inferior root of 4 
ansa Cervicahls se 

J To C5 

Phrenic nerve 
Supraclavicular nerve 

Fig. 5.21: Cervical plexus 
Q Branches: - 3 groups: 

a) Communicating branches. 
1. Grey rami from superior cervical ganglion to all roots. 
2. From C1 to hypoglossal (forming superior limb of ansa cervicalis). 
3. From C2 to sternomastoid & C2, 3&4 to trapezius (sensory supply). 

b) Cutaneous branches (see posterior triangle) 
1- Supraclavicular (medial - lateral - intermediate) (C3&4). 
2- Transverse cervical (C2&3). 
3- Great auricular (C2&3). 
4- Lesser occipital (C2) 

¢) Muscular to: 
1- Infrahyoid muscles by ansa cervicalis. 
2- Prevertebral and scalene muscles. 
3- Levator scapulae, trapezius, and sternomastoid. 
4- Diaphragm by phrenic nerve. 

*Ansa cervicalis: (Fig. 5.18¢ & Fig. 5.22) 
* A nervous loop related to infrahyoid muscles & carotid sheath. 
*Site: Front of carotid sheath at the level of lower part of larynx. 
*Structure: formed of 2 limbs: 

323 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

1- Superior limb: (descending hypoglossi): Formed of fibers from C1 that join 12% nerve, then 

leave it & descend in front of carotid sheath. 
2- Inferior limb: (descending cervicalis): Formed of fibers from C2&3 that descend in front of 

IJV, and then join the superior limb in front of the sheath. 
*Branches: - supply the infra-hyoid muscles from the convexity of the loop. 

i Hypoglossal narve 

C1/C2 Roots 

Z= Muscles of the tongue 

Geniohyoid 

Thyrohyoid 

Sup. belly of 
omohyoid 

 Sternohyoid 

Inf. belly  Stermothyroid 
of omohyoid 28 

Fig. 5.22: Branches of ansa cervicalis 

Cervical Sympathetic Trunk 
(Fig. 5.23) 

General notes: 
. A ganglionic chain presents on each side of the neck, extends from the neck of the first rib 

to the base of the skull. 
. Each chain lies between prevertebral fascia posteriorly & carotid sheath anteriorly 

opposite the transverse processes of cervical vertebrae. 
« It carries 3 ganglia on each side (superior, middle & inferior). 
. There is no white rami communicant in the neck, so their preganglionic fibers arise from 

upper thoracic segments then ascend in the chain. 
« Their postganglionic fibers divided into 3 groups: 

a- Ist group acts as communicant rami to the nearest nerves. 
b- 2nd group form vascular plexus around the nearest artery. 
c- 3rd group sends visceral branches to the nearest viscera. 

» Some of the nerve fibers connecting the middle and inferior cervical ganglia turn around 
the subclavian artery and are called ansa subclavia. 

324 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

» The source of the pre-ganglionic sympathetic fibers to the head and neck is from the 
upper thoracic ganglia and ascend in the cervical sympathetic trunk. 

To imemal 
carotid plexus 

To carotid body 
and sinus 

To extemal 
carotid plexus 

Superior cardiac nerve 

Middie cervical ganglion 

Midand ilnfereior 
cardiac nerves 

Fig. 5.23: Cervical sympathetic chain 

Table 5.1: Comparison between the cervical sympathetic ganglia 

Superior cervical Middle cervical Inferior cervical 
ganglion ganglion ganglion 

Size The largest (1linch) The smallest Midway 

0 Spindle shape Pin head shape. May fuse with T1 to 
Shape 

form star shaped 

Between E.C.A and Related to inf. thyroid Opposite transverse 
Site longus capitis at level a. behind carotid process of C7 + neck of 

of C2, C3 sheath at C6,C7 first rib 

By fusion of upper 4 By fusion of 5th & 6th By fusion of C7, C8 
Formation cervical ganglia cervical ganglia cervical ganglia. 

Superior cervical Middle cervical Inferior cervical 
ganglion ganglion. ganglion 

325 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

a) Communicating 
a) Communicating branches with C5, 6 

with upper 4 cervical nerves 
+ lower 4 cranial b) Vascular plexus 
nerves. round inferior a) Communicating with 

b) Vascular plexus thyroid artery. 9 
. C7,8 nerves. 

around ICA & ECA. ¢) Ansa subclavia 
. b) Vascular plexus 

Ee ¢) Visceral branches around subclavian 
Branches around vertebral 

1- Pharyngeal to artery. 
: artery. 

pharyngeal d) Visceral branches 
: ¢) Visceral branches 

plexus. 1- Thyroid plexus : : ; 
; ; Inferior cervical cardiac 

2- Superior cervical 2- Middle cardiac : 
: ; to deep cardiac plexus. 

cardiac to cervical to deep 
superficial cardiac plexus. 
cardiac plexus. 3- tracheal 

3- Thyroid nerves. branches. 
4- Esophageal. 

THE LAST FOUR CRANIAL NERVE 

1- GlossopharyNenrvaee (aIX)l: (Fig. 5.24) 
» General notes: - The nerve of 3rd arch 
» Type: - mixed cranial nerve. 
» Number of ganglia: 2 ganglia, superior & inferior. 
>» Types of fibers: 

1. Branchiomotor to stylopharyngeus (m.). 
2. General visceral efferent Secretomotor to parotid gland. 
3. Special visceral afferent taste from post. 1/3 of tongue. 
4. General somatic afferent from oropharynx, posterior 1/3 of tongue, tonsils, 

auditory tube & middle ear. 
> Exit from the skull: through the middle part of jugular foramen. 
» Extracranial course: 

- Descends between [/V & ICA deep to styloid apparatus, 
- Then turns around stylopharyngeus m, 
- Passes between 1.1.V. & I.C.A. (within carotid sheath). 
- Passes between |.C.A. & E.C.A. (lying on Stylopharyngeus muscle.) 
- It curves forwards and medially to pass between superior and middle constrictors 
of pharynx and deep to hyoglossus muscle to be distributed to tonsil, tongue 

(posterior 1/3 and vallate papillae) and pharynx (mucous membrane). 

326 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

Fig. 5.24.: Glossopharyngeal nerve 

» Branches: (Fig. 5.25) 
1. Tympanic branch: arises from the inferior ganglion to enter the middle ear via 

tympanic canaliculus & share in tympanic plexus {gives branches to greater petrosal 
n., lesser petrosal n. (for parotid gland) + sensory supply to mucosa of middle ear, 
auditory tube & mastoid air cells). 

. Carotid branch: descends on the wall of ICA to supply the carotid sinus & carotid 
body 

. Pharyngeal: share in pharyngeal plexus supply pharynx by sensory fibers. 

. Muscular: branch to stylopharyngeus m. 

. Tonsillar: share in tonsillar plexus to supply palatine tonsil & soft palate. 

. Lingual (terminal): to mucosa of posterior 1/3 of tongue, carry general &special 
taste sensations. 

Applied anatomy: 
1. Tested clinically by gentle tickling of posterior wall of pharynx to produce contraction of 

throat muscles, lost if paralyzed. 
2. Usually affected in combination with 10%. 

327 

UhWw  Ng 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

Faci.a l nerve Less er superfrifciiciaall  peptertorsaols al nerve 

Otic ganglion 

Parotid gland 
BN
 

0 

Superior ganglion 

Inferior ganglion | | ——Tympanic branch 
) (Jacobson’s nerve) 

Stylopharyngeus 

9 \ Soft palate 

Sinus nerve 
[ 

Middle 
constrictor 

sinus 4 Pharyngeal branch Hyoid bone 

Carotid 
body 

Fig. 5.25: Branches of the glossopharyngeal Nerve 

2- VaNegrve u(X): s(Fig. 5.26) 

» Type: mixed cranial nerve, 

» Number of ganglia: 2 sensory ganglia, 
superior & inferior. 

» Types of fibres: 
1. Branchiomotor, to pharynx, larynx 

&palate by cranial 11, 
2. General visceral efferent inhibitory 

to heart + motor & secretomotor to 
bronchi, foregut below pharynx, 
midgut, liver and pancreas. 

3. General visceral afferent from 
mucosa of respiratory & digestive Fig. 5.26: Vagus nerve 
Systemes. 

328 

f—e ———— —  —  — —————————

¥ a 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

4. Special visceral afferent (Gustatory to epiglottis). 
5. General somatic afferent (Sensory from external ear). 

>» Exit from the skull: through the middle part of jugular foramen. 

» Extracranial course: 
- Below the inferior ganglion, the vagus nerve is joined by cranial part of accessory 
nerve, which is distributed through its pharyngeal and recurrent laryngeal branches. 

- The vagus runs vertically down the neck within the carotid sheath, lying at first 
between [.J.V. & |.C.A., then between |.J.V. & C.C.A. 

- It crosses first part of subclavian artery to enter thorax (on Rt. Side) but passes 
between Lt. subclavian artery and Lt. C.C.A. to enter thorax (on left. side). 

» Branches: (Fig. 5.27 & 5.28) divided as following:-(2 branches from superior ganglion + 
2 from inferior ganglion +3 from vagus in the neck +2 branches in the thorax). 
A) From the superior vagal ganglion: 

1- Meningeal nerve - supplies the dura of the posterior cranial fossa. 
2- Auricular nerve: get outside via tympano- mastoid fissure to supply {concha & 

root of auricle, + post. 1/2 of external auditory meatus & tympanic membrane). 
B) From inferior vaqal ganglion: 

1- Pharyngeal nerve: (Most of its fibers are from cranial accessory n.) reaches 
middle constrictor to share in pharyngeal plexus. 

2- Superior laryngeal nerve: divides into 2 branches: 
*External laryngeal nerve: passes with superior thyroid artery then pierces 
inferior constrictor supplying it and cricothyroid (m.) 
*Internal laryngeal nerve: Passes downward, pierces thyrohyoid membrane to 
supply laryngeal mucosa above vocal cord. 

C) Branches int he neck: 
1. Carotid nerve supplying carotid body. 
2. Cardiac nerves (superior and inferior) from each vagus, the left inferior passes to 

superficial cardiac plexus while the other 3 share in deep cardiac plexus. 
3. Rt recurrent laryngeal nerve arises from RT vagus in front of RT subclavian a. 

then turns around it &ascends in tracheo-esophageal groove to pass with 
inferior thyroid a. to supply larynx (muscle& mucosa below vocal cord). 

D) Branches of in the Thorax: 
1- Left recurrent laryngeal nerve (winds around arch of aorta). 
2- Pulmonary and cardiac branches. 

329 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

Carsoinuts birandch 

internal branch of superior by yaw | Lot 

Superior cervical cardiac br 

inferior cervical cardiac branch 

Esophageal ples 

Postevargail torurnk 

Ceflac branches 

Sm 

AN 
= 

3 

Fig. 5.27: Branches of vagus nerve 

330



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

Meningeal branch jugular foramen 

ON 3 Dy ~ 
Cranial root of OM \ 
accessory nerve | 

Auncular branch 
(Alderman’s nerve) 

\ Pharyngeal branch 

. Superior laryngeal nerve 
Sinus nerve —J4 

) 

i or Internal 
\. i {) laryngeal nerve 

Carotid sinus 
iil External Y 

laryngeal nerve | 

Cncothyrod 
muscle 

Trachea 

Esophagus —#— 

-—= Recurrent 
Subclavian laryngeal nerve 

artery 

J 

Fig. 5.28: Branches of vagus nerve 

Applied anatomy: 
1- Tested clinically by examining the palatal arches on both sides, on paralysis there is no 

arching and uvula is deviated to the normal side. 
2- Vagal paralysis leads to (nasal regurgitation, hoarseness of voice, flattened palatal arches, 

cadaveric position of vocal cords & dysphagia). 
3- Irritation of auricular branch of vagus in external ear by wax or ear wash causes reflex 

cough. 

3: Accessory Nerve (XI): (Fig. 5.29) 

> Type: mixed n. formed of 2 separate parts spinal &cranial {join 10). 

= Cranial Part of Accessory: 
- Arises from nucleus ambiguus of medulla oblongata. 
- Exit from brain: (Medulla) groove between olive and inferior cerebellar peduncle 
below vagus nerve. 

- It runs to jugular foramen where it unites with spinal part. 
- Exit from skull: Through jugular foramen with vagus and glossopharyngeal 
nerves. 

- After its exit from jugular foramen, it separates from spinal part and unites with 
vagus. 

331 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

- It is distributed to pharynx, palate and larynx through pharyngeal and recurrent 
laryngeal branches of vagus. 

= Spinal Part of Accessory: 
- Axons of nerve cells in spinal accessory nucleus (found in upper 5 cervical 
segments). 

- Ascend and enter cranial cavity through foramen magnum. 
- Joins cranial root as they pass to jugular foramen. 
- Separates from cranial root and supplies sternomastoid and trapezius. (Fig. 5.29) 

Vagus nerve 

Cranial root of 
accessory nerve 

Spinal root of 
accessory nerve 

Foramen 
magnum Accessory nerve 

Muscles of 
palate 
Muscles of 
pharynx 

\ | - Muscles of 
= larynx 

Spinal accessory nerve 

Trapezius 3 1} Stermnocleidomastoid 

Fig. 5.29: Accessory nerve 
Applied anatomy: 
1- Tested clinically by elevating shoulder against resistance (trapezius) or turning the face to 

the opposite side (sternomastoid) | 
2- Irritation of the 11th nerve by enlarged L.N. may produce Torticollis. 

4- alNe rve (XI): (Fig. 5.30) 

>» Type: motor cranial nerve. 
> Types of fibers: somatic efferent. 
» Exit from the skull: via hypoglossal canal 
» Extracranial course: 

- Firstly, lies deep to ICA & (9.10.11) cranial nerves, then turns to become lateral to 
them & passes between / JV& ICA. 

- Then descends till the lower border of posterior belly of digastric & passes forward 
to enter digastric A, running over hyoglossus m. till its anterior border to pass to 
undersurface of the tongue. 

332

——— 

iy 



CHAPTER V ANATOMY OF THE NECK 

Fig. 5.30.: Hypoglossal nerve 
» Branches: -are of 2 types: 

1- The first group: {Fig. 5.31) fibers from C1"related anatomically to hypoglossal". 
a- Meningeal nerve: contains sensory & sympathetic fibers supplying bone & 

meninges of anterior part of posterior cranial fossa. 
b- Nerve to thyrohyoid. 
¢c- Nerve to geniohyoid. 
d- Descending hypoglossi or upper root of ansa cervicalis. 

2- The second group: “from hypoglossal itself": supplies the following: 
- Styloglossus, hyoglossus & genioglossus +all intrinsic muscles. 

. 

- . a. 

Fig. 5.31: Branches of hypoglossal nerve 

Applied anatomy: 
Tested clinically by protruding the tongue outside (protruded straight) 

LJ In unilateral paralysis, the tongue is deviated to the affected side & when retracted to inside 
the paralyzed side raises up higher. 
In bilateral paralysis, the tongue lies motionless, while sensation is perfect; articulation is 
slow with difficult swallowing. 

333 

EE —a—— ee — —————
assess EEE eo 
- 

qf ' Lede of nePgEE Xf FA) 
% S 

Central Nervous 
System 

EDITION 



CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 

MODULE 

Study Guide 

Fourth Edition 

Part 2 

By Staff Members of Faculty of Medicine 
Ain Shams University



TABLE OF CONTENT 

. Table of Contea nts 

CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, SLEEP 
AND EPILEPSY ( 335 TO 372) 

1. ANATOMY: Thalamus P 339 
2. ANATOMY: Hypothalamus and Third Ventricle P 342 
3. PHYSIOLOGY: Functions of Reticular Formation & Electrical activity of the Brain P 346 
4. PHYSIOLOGY: Sleep and Arousal P 350 
5. PHARMACOLOGY: Sedatives and Hypnotics P 355 
6. PHARMACOLOGY: Anesthesia P 359 
7. PHARMACOLOGY: Epilepsy and Migraines P 366 

CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM, MENINGES AND HIGHER BRAIN 

FUNCTION 

(373 TO 411) 
1. PHYSIOLOGY: Cerebral Dominance and Association Areas ~~ P:375 
2. PHYSIOLOGY: Speech, Language and Apnasis P:377 
1. ANATOMY: Limbic System | SS P:382 
3. PHYSIOLOGY: Functions of the Limbic System P: 384 
4, PHYSIOLOGY: Hypothalamus P: 385 
5. PHYSIOLOGY: Memory, Learning and Amnesia P: 387 
6. PHARMACOLOGY: Antidepressants P: 395 
7. ANATOMY: Cerebral White Matter P: 400 
8. ANATOMY: Lateral ventricle, cerebral meninges & CSF circulation  P: 403 
9. ANATOMY: Cerebral Blood Supply P: 407 

CHAPTER VIII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE AND 
NERVOUS SYSTEM ( 412 TO 461) 

1. MICRO: Infections Affecting Muscle Tone P:414 
2. MICRO: Bacterial Meningitis P:418 
3. MICRO: Fungal Meningitis P: 425 
4. MICRO: Aseptic Meningitis and Poliomyelitis P:428 
5. PHARMA: Treatment of Meningitis P:433 
6. MICRO: Viral Encephalitis P:439 
7. MICRO: Rabies P:441 
8. PARASITOLOGY: Amoebic Encephalitis P: 446 
9. PARASITOLOGY: Larvae affecting the Brain P.452 
10. PATHOLOGY: Pathological Aspects of CNS Infections P:457 

335



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 

sleep & epilepsy 

CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE &DEMYLINATING 
DISEASES, TRUMA, VASCULAR DISORDERS & TUMORS 

(462 TO 501) 
1. PATHOLOGY: Neurodegenerative and Myelin Diseases P: 464 
2. PHARMA: Treatment of Neurodegenerative and Myelin Diseases P:473 
3. PATHOLOGY: CNS Trauma P:480 
4. PATHOLOGY: Cerebrovascular Diseases P:481 

5. PATHOLOGY: CNS Tumors P:487 
6. Psychiatry : Dementia: types, causes & clinical considerations ( clinical applications) 

P:497 

CHAPTER X: MISCELANEOUS AND EMBRYOLOGY ( 502 TO 540) 
1. PHARMA: Antipsychotics drugs P:504 
2. PHARMA: Drug Abuse P:511 
3. ANATOMY: Pharyngeal arches & Development of head & neck P: 517 
4, ANATOMY: Development of face P: 523 
5. ANATOMY: Development of nervous system P: 525 

336 



Far Ne = ap - SE 

CHAPTER Vi: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

Chapter -VI 

DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR 

FORMATION, SLEEP AND EPILEPSY 

337



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
SLEEP AND EPILEPSY 

Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs): 

By the end of this chapter the student should be able to: 

e¢ Describe different parts of diencephalon, main nuclei, connections, relations and 
blood supply. 

¢ Describe boundaries communications, relations and recesses of the third 
ventricle. 
Describe the content and function of reticular formation. 
Identify the role of reticular activating system and factors affecting it. 
Outline the types of brain potentials. 
Describe the electroencephalogram waves and mention the value of EEG. 
Differentiate between sleep and coma and between different types of sleep. 
Explain function and mechanism of sleep. 
Classify different types of anxiolytic, hypnotics and anesthetics. 
Predict therapeutic uses and adverse effects of each drug. 
Apply the pharmacological bases for proper selection of the anxiolytic and 
hypnotic drugs in the management of anxiety disorders and sleep disorders. 
Realize the advantages of sedative hypnotics and sedative anxiolytic over 
benzodiazepine. 
Explain the action and advantages of Ramelteon. 
Classify different types of general anesthetics. 
Realize the concept of balanced anesthesia and how to achieve. 
ldentify the molecular mechanism of action and adverse effects of general 
anesthetics. 
Recognize the advantage of new general anesthetics. 

oe |dentify the molecular mechanism of action of local anesthetics, uses, toxicity 
and side effects. 

e Explain the importance of vasoconstrictors, tissue pH and drug pKa on activity of 
local anesthetics. 

e (Classify antiepileptic drugs and identify their mechanism of action. 
Choose the proper antiepileptic drugs for each type of epilepsy and according to 
age, gender and daily activity. 
Apply pharmacokinetic bases for proper combinations of antiepileptic drugs. 
Link drug interactions with specific adverse effect of antiepileptic drugs. 
Diagnose convulsive status epilepticus and its serious complications. 
Construct a summarized treatment algorithm for status epilepticus based on the 
most recent guidelines. 
Provide a pharmacotherapeutic plan for termination of acute migraine attack. 

e Decide the appropriate drugs that can be used for migraine prophylaxis. 

338 



CHAPTER VI; DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

DIENCEPHALON (Fig. 6.1) 

The diencephalon includes everything with the name thalamus i.e. Thalamus, hypothalamus, 
epithalamus & subthalamus. 
Its cavity is the 3 ventricle. 
It is divided by the hypothalamic sulcus (which extends from the interventricular foramen to 
the mouth of the cerebral aqueduct) into 

Fig. 6.1: medial surface of cerebral hemisphere 
Dorsal part: 

1. Thalamus. 
2. Metathalamus (MGB & LGB). 
3. Epithalamus {pineal body, habenular nuclei & posterior commissure). 

Ventral part: 
1. Hypothalamus. 
2. Subthalamus. 

THALA 

e tis an oval mass of grey matter which acts as a gateway for the cerebral cortex. 
it relays all sensations except smell. It also relays motor and limbic impulses going to the 
cerebral cortex. 

e It has 2 ends: 
- A narrow anterior end which lies posterior to interventricular foramen of Monro. 
- Its posterior end is expanded to form the pulvinar. 

o |t has 4 surfaces: (Figs. 6.1 & 6.2) 
- Superior surface -» is free, related to the choroid plexus and forms part of the floor of 

the body of lateral ventricle. 
- Inferior surface —-> is separated by hypothalamic sulcus from subthalamus & 

hypothalamus. The posterior part of this surface shows the medial & lateral geniculate 
bodies. 

- Medial surface => Forms the lateral wall of 3 ventricle. Both medial surfaces are 
connected together by the interthalamic adhesion (connexus). 

- Lateral surface —- separated from the lentiform nucleus by the internal capsule. 

339 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 

sleep & epilepsy 

Head of 

VA \ caudate 

Lat. Ventricle, { ') nudeus 
ant. horn i A;  1) : 

5 el entiform 
i 4 cS nucleus 

Septum pe fo 
pellucidum 

alamus 

Third Ventricle 
Tail of 

Lat. Ventricle, caudate 
post. horn nucleus 

Fig. 6.2: T.5 in cerebral hemispheres 

Thalamic nuclei: (Fig. 6.3) The grey matter of thalamus is divided by a Y-shaped sheet of white 
matter, internal medullary lamina, into: 

{. Anterior part = Between the fork of the lamina. 
ll. Medial part = Medial to the lamina. 
lll. Lateral part - Lateral to the lamina. 

I. Anterior nuclei: 
- Site: between the 2 limbs of the Y-shaped internal medullary lamina. 
- Afferents: receives the mammillo-thalamic tract from the mammillary bodies. 
- Efferents: sends the anterior thalamic radiation to the cingulate gyrus. 
- Function: forms part of the limbic system (Papez circuit) which is concerned with 

emotions and recent memory. 

Il. Medial nuclei (Dorso-medial nucleus): 
- Afferents: from the hypothalamus, amygdala & olfactory cortex 
- Efferents: via the medial forebrain bundle to the prefrontal cortex. 
- Function: forms part of the limbic system involved in thinking & mood. 

Premotor area pe 

Motor area 2. fa = Cingulate gyrus 

Sensory area = = Visual area 
Prefrontal cortex 

Auditory area 
y Med. nudel 

Ant. nuclel Internal medullary 
lamina 

LD. & LP. pulvinar 
VA 

T ViorVi MGB 

Lat. nucle VEL 

LGB 
VPM 

Fig. 6.3: Thalamic nuclei 

340 



CHAPTER Vi: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 

sleep & epilepsy 

lll. Lateral part of thalamus: Divided into: 
e Dorsal tier: 

- Includes 3 association nuclei: Lateral-dorsal nucleus, Lateral-posterior nucleus & 
Pulvinar. 

- Afferents: they receive input from the other thalamic nuclei and integrate them; 
the thalamus is considered as a multisensory processing unit. 

- Efferents: to the sensory association areas of the cortex. 
e Ventral tier: 3 nuclei: 

1- Ventral-anterior (VA) nucleus: 
- Afferents: from the basal ganglia (globus pallidus). 
- Efferents: to the supplementary motor area. 
- Function: relays motor circuits. 

2- Ventral-lateral or ventral-intermediate (VL or VI) nucleus: 
- Afferents: from the cerebellar nuclei. 
- Efferents: to the motor and premotor areas. 
- Function: relays motor planning of voluntary movement. 

3- Ventral-posterior nucleus (VP nucleus) is sensory & includes 2 parts: 
a. VP Lateral (VPL) 

- Afferents: receives the medial & spinal leminsci. 
- Efferents: to the upper 2/3 (body area) of the postcentral gyrus. 

b. VP Medial (VPM) 
- Afferents: receives the trigeminal lemniscus & solitariothalamic tract 

(carrying taste). 
- Efferents: to the lower 1/3 (head area) of the postcentral gyrus. 

Other thalamic nuclei: 
eo Medial & lateral geniculate bodies: (both are called metathalamus) 

1. The medial geniculate body (MGB) 
- Afferents: receives auditory input from the inferior colliculus of midbrain. 
- Efferents: projects auditory radiation to the auditory area of cortex. 

2. The lateral geniculate body (LGB) 
- Receives visual input from the optic tract. 
- Projects optic radiation to the visual area of cortex. 

¢ 3 Non-specific nuclei which occupy strategic positions in the thalamus: 
1. Intralaminar nuclei (within the internal medullary lamina). 
2. Midline nuclei (on the medial surface of thalamus beneath the ependyma of 3" 

ventricle): 
- Afferents: from the reticular formation of the brain stem. 
- Efferents: to the whole cortex non-specifically; increases its activity. 
- Functions: part of RAS responsible for alertness. 

3. Reticular nucleus: 
- Site: on the lateral surface of the thalamus. 
- Afferents: from whole cerebral cortex. 
- Efferents: do not leave the thalamus but end on the thalamic nuclei. 
- Functions: inhibits the thalamic nuclei during sleep. 

341 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

Blood Supply: 

Arterial: Posteromedial and posterolateral groups of posterior cerebral artery. 
Venous drainage: by the thalamaostriate vein. 

Applied: Thalamic syndrome 

HYPOTHALAMUS AND THIRD VENTRICLE 

HYPOTHALAMUS 
(Fig. 6.4) 

Site & extent: (Fig. 6.4) It lies below the 
thalamus separated from it by the 
hypothalamic sulcus. 

- Anteriorly, it extends till the lamina 
terminals 

- Posteriorly, it extends till a vertical plane 
posterior to mammillary bodies 

- Superiorly, it extends till the 
hypothalamic sulcus 

- Inferiorly, it forms the base of the brain 
beneath the 3 ventricle (the floor of the Tuber dnereum Mammillary body 
interpeduncular fossa). Fig. 6.4 Hypothalamus 

Parts: (Fig. 6.5) 
1. Optic chiasma. 
2. Tuber cinereum {median eminence) & infundibular stalk. 
3. Mammillary bodies. 3  Infundibulum 

oe Tuber cinereum 
Functions: - Mammillary body 

1. It controls the autonomic nervous system 
and endocrine system (pituitary). 

2. It regulates fluid intake, food ingestion and 
body temperature. 

3. It controls emotions, reproduction and 
; Fig. 6.5: interpeduncular fossa 

biological clock. 

Connections 

1. With the prefrontal cortex: 

342 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

The medial forebrain bundle connects it (both-ways) with the dorsomedial nucleus of 
thalamus. 

2. With the limbic system (see limbic system for SAN) 
details) (Fig. 6.6) yo=o~ R- ~ DG PN 

a. The medial forebrain bundle { " { 4 = ) 
b. The fornix. oo : —_ A 7 
¢. The stria terminalis OI Tn 

Septal ares ~§ i 
Amyadale ’ hippocampus 

Med. forebrain bundle” 
3. With lower centers: 
The posterior longitudinal fasciculus (in the central grey) carries efferents to the vital 
autonomic nuclei of the brain stem & spinal cord 
LHC]. Fig. 6.6: connections to limbic structures 

Supraoptic ne. Faraventricular mc. 

4. With pituitary gland: (Fig. 6.7) 
Hypothalamus is connected with: Arcuste ne. 
u Posterior pituitary: via nervous Sapetiz 

connection capillaries Hypothalamo- 
* Anterior pituitary: via vascular Portal bypopirysesl 

connection vessels 
(Will be discussed in details in the 

endocrine module) 

THALAM 

- Site: it is inferior to thalamus, separated from it by the hypothalamic sulcus. It lies between 
thalamus and tegmentum of mid brain and is related medially to hypothalamus. 

- |t contains subthalamic nucleus which is closely related to the basal ganglia (involved in 
control of muscular activity). 

- Its lesion = Hemiballismus 

PITH/ 

The epithalamus includes the pineal body, habenular nuclei and the posterior commissure. 
(fig. 6.8) 

343 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

Pineal body: +. ,Habenular stria 

- lt is a small reddish grey organ, 8 mm in length Splenium 

which hangs between the two superior colliculi. It 
IRE ed commissure 

lies inferior to the splenium of corpus callosum. Its 
base (stalk) is directed anteriorly and forms two 

“—__ Pineal body 
laminae; a superior and an inferior laminae. The 
superior lamina contains habenular commissure 
while the inferior lamina contains the posterior het “J\.Sup. colliculus 
commissure. The space between the two laminae Posterior commissure 
of the stalk is a recess “pineal recess” of the 3" Fig. 6.8: epithalamus 
ventricle. 

- Function: It is an endocrine gland that inhibits the pituitary gland, pancreas, parathyroids, 
adrenal cortex and gonads. It is active in the dark secreting melatonin hormone by its 
pinealocytes. 

- After puberty, it becomes calcified forming the brain sand which is a landmark in skull x- 
rays. 

Habenular nuclei: 
- The habenular nuclei lie in the habenular trigone, antero-superior to the superior 

colliculus. 
- The right and left nuclei are connected together by the habenular commissure which 

passes through the superior lamina of pineal stalk. 
- The habenular nuclei receives olfactory input via the habenular stria & sends output to the 

brainstem visceral nuclei (salivatory, dorsal vagal & ambiguus) via the fasciculus 
retroflexus. Thus smell of food stimulates salivation, gastric secretions & motility. 

Posterior commissure: 
- This traverses the inferior lamina of pineal stalk. 
- It contains small nuclei as the Darkschwitscz nucleus and the interstitial nucleus of Cajal. 
- Function: it connects: 

1. The superior colliculi of both sides, 
2. The medial longitudinal bundles of both sides. 
3. The pretectal nuclei of both sides. 

THIRD VENTRICLE 
(Fig. 6.9) 

e [tis the cavity of the Diencephalon. 
e Communications: 

1. With the lateral ventricles via the interventricular foramen of Monro. 
2. With the fourth ventricle via the cerebral aqueduct of Sylvius. 

e Boundaries: It has a roof, floor, anterior, posterior & lateral walls. 
- Lateral Wall: Thalamus and hypothalamus. 
- Roof: Layer of ependyma covered by the tela choroidea of the third ventricle. Choroid 

plexus of third ventricle hangs from its roof as two longitudinal elevations. 
- Floor: Formed mostly of hypothalamic structures (optic chiasma, infundibulum, tuber 

cinereum, mammillary bodies), posterior perforated substance + tegmentum of 

344 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 

sleep & epilepsy 

midbrain. 
- Anterior Wall: Lamina terminalis, column of fornix, anterior commissure. 
- Posterior Wall: Posterior commissure, pineal body, suprapineal recess. 

Thalamus 

Column of fornix 

Anterior commissure 

{Lamina terminalis | 

Optic chiasma 

infundibulum 

Wry: - - ee be rm EE A pet 

1. Optic recess: above optic chiasma Suprapineal 
2. Infundibular recess: extends into fBgass 

pituitary stalk 
| Optic —— r | Pineal 

recess 
3. Pineal recess: extends between recess 7 

laminae of stalk of pineal gland a 
4. Suprapineal recess: extends above "i 

pineal gland infundibular recess 

Fig. 6.10: Recesses of third ventricle 

345 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

FUNCTIONS OF RETICULAR FORMATION and ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY 
OF BRAIN 

The reticular formation (RF) somatosensory 
cingulate prop cortex 

- It is a widespread network of certex | > — 

interconnected neurons located in X@ WoT ’ N 
the brain stem. {OS |) thalamus 

- It extends upwards to the thalamus 1 | : 
and hypothalamus and its lower end 
is continuous with the interneurons 
of the spinal cord. RIL - 1 

TE locus 
coeruleus 

Types of cells in RF: 

e Sensory neurons fsticuigs 

¢ Motor neurons pone 

Fig. 6.11: Reticular formation 
a) Sensory neurons 

- These neurons make interconnections with each other and allow convergence, 
divergence and after discharge. These neurons receive afferent impulses from: 

v' Long ascending sensory tracts (spinothalamic tracts and dorsal column) 
v' Trigeminal, visual, auditory and olfactory nervous pathway 
v' Basal ganglia 
v' Vestibular apparatus 
v' Hypothalamus 
v' Cerebellum 
v' Cerebral cortex 

b) Motor neurons 
- The reticular nuclei are divided into 2 groups which function antagonistically to each 
other: 

[. Pontine reticular nuclei. 
Il. Medullary reticular nuclei. 
I. Pontine reticular nuclei (Reticular Excitatory Area) 

- This area is also known by the name bulboreticular facilitatory area. 
It forms most of the reticular formation. 
It is located in the pons and midbrain. 
It has an intrinsic activity. 
It has ascending and descending fibers: 
1) Ascending fibers discharge excitatory signals upward to all areas of cerebral 

cortex. These fibers compose the ascending reticular activating system 
(RAS). Most of these go first to the thalamus (midline and intralaminar 
nuclei) which, in turn, project diffusely and nonspecifically to almost all parts 
of the cerebral cortex. 
RAS is responsible for arousal (awaking) state of the individual. 

346 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 

sleep & epilepsy 

2} Descending fibers transmits facilitatory signals downward to the spinal 
motor neurons that control antigravity muscles through ventral 
reticulospinal tract increasing the antigravity muscles tone. 
Stimulation has a generalized activating effect on both flexor and extensor 
muscles, with its predominant effect on extensors. 
The activity of the reticular excitatory area is increased by impulses from 
area 4, neocerebellum, vestibular nucleus, basal ganglia ((caudate) 

- The activity of the reticular excitatory area is inhibited by impulses from 
reticular inhibitory area, inhibitory areas of cerebral cortex, paleocerebellum, 
basal ganglia and red nucleus. 

Il. Medullary reticular nuclei {Reticular Inhibitory Area) 
- It is located in the medulla oblongata. It has no intrinsic activity. 
- This area can inhibit the reticular facilitatory area and thereby decrease activity 

in the brain. 
- ft sends inhibitory impulses to the spinal motor neurons that control antigravity 
muscles through lateral reticulospinal tract decreasing antigravity muscles 
tone. Stimulation has a generalized inhibitory effect on both flexor and extensor 
muscles, with the predominant effect on extensors. 

- Its activity is stimulated by impulses from the inhibitory areas of cerebral cortex, 
paleocerebellum, basal ganglia and red nucleus. 

Ascending reticular activating system (ARAS or RAS) 
- This 1s a muttineuronal polysynaptic system of nerve fibers that originates at the excitatory 

reticular formation. 
- Its fibers extend upwards then some project directly to the cerebral cortex while the 
majority relay first at the nonspecific thalamic nuclei from which fibers arise and diffuse to 
almost all parts of the cerebral cortex. This pathway is called reticulo-thalamo-cortical 
pathway. 

Functions of RAS: 
1. Arousal and consciousness: 

The RAS discharges to the thalamus and cortex to potentiate thalamic and cortical 

activity. 

2. Attention: 

The RAS mediates transitions from relaxed wakefulness to periods of high attention 

and alertness. 

Causes of stimulation and inhibition of the RAS 
I. Factors stimulating RAS 

" Sensory signals that enter the brain from the periphery in particular pain signals. 
= Signals from the cerebral cortex (positive feedback) (as during emotions, brain 

thought processes or motor processes). 
= Analeptic and Sympathomimetic drugs 
m Stress 
s (Caffeine 
t= Thyroid hormone 

347 



CHAPTER Vi: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

Il. Factors inhibiting RAS 
= Lack of sensory input signals or cerebral cortex signals 
» Signals from sleep centers 
= General anesthesia 
= Damage as by tumors and vascular lesions. 

= Alcohol 
= Sleep inducing drugs 
®* Tranquilizers 

Lesion in RAS 
Causes impaired consciousness and severe damage can cause coma 

Functions of reticular formation: 
1. It is a vital link between higher centers in the brain and lower centers in the spinal cord, 

through it these centers are integrated with each other. 
2. Maintenance of posture and equilibrium and muscle tone. 

During standing there are continuous facilitatory impulses passing from the reticular 
formation and vestibular nucleus to motor neurons of the spinal cord to increase muscle 
tone in extensors thus help to support the body. 

3. Arousal and consciousness: 
- RAS controls the overall degree of the cerebral cortex alertness causing wakefulness 

(normal alert conscious state). RAS is responsible for arousal and attention. 
- Decreased activity of the RAS leads to decreased activity of cerebral cortex, leading 

to sleep or loss of consciousness. 
4. RF contains many of the areas concerned with regulation of heart rate, blood pressure, 

respiration and many digestive activities. 
5. Pain modulation: 

- lt is the site of perception of slow pain (It is one mean by which pain signals 
from lower body reach cerebral cortex). 

- Also, it is the origin of descending analgesic system. Projections from raphe 
nuclei down to dorsal horn of the spinal cord inhibit pain sensations (block 
transmission of pain signals to the brain). 

6. The mechanism that triggers REM sleep is located in the pontine reticular formation. 

ELECTRICAL ACTIVITY OF BRAIN 

There is continuous electrical activity recorded in the brain. 
Types of potentials recorded from brain: 
e Evoked potentials. 
e Spontaneous potential = electroencephalogram. 
1. Evoked cortical potentials 

e These are the electrical events that occur in the cerebral cortex after stimulation of 
receptor. 

e They are recorded by placing the exploring electrode over the excited cortical area. 
eo Evoked cortical potentials are 2 types: 

a- Primary evoked potential 
- It is in the form of + ve wave followed by a — ve wave. 
- It is recorded from specific area of cerebral cortex (localized) 

348 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

b- Secondary evoked potential (Diffuse secondary response) 
- It follows the primary evoked potential and consists of large prolonged + ve 
wave. 

- [tis not localized. 
- It is due to activation of cortical neurons by impulses arriving from the non- 

specific thalamic nuclei. 
Evoked cortical potentials are used for: 

- Mapping of brain areas. 
- Diagnosis of diseases. 

2. Spontaneous potential = electroencephalogram (EEG) or brain waves 
e [tis the record of spontaneous electrical activity of the brain in conscious subjects by 

applying electrodes to the scalp of the patient. 
eo The EEG recorded from the scalp is not the result of action potentials but it is a 

measure of the summation of postsynaptic potentials of neurons in cerebral cortex. 
eo The electrocorticogram is the record obtained with electrodes applied directly on 

surface of the cortex. 
e EEG recording should be performed in calm room with comfortable temperature and 

the person should be in complete physical and mental rest. 
Electroencephalogram waves 

a (Alpha) wave 
e [tis the wave of adult awake relaxed person with eye closed. 

Site of recording: occipital, parietal and frontal regions. 
Amplitude: 50 uv. 
Frequency: 8-13 cycles/sec. 
It is produced by activity of non-specific thalamic nuclei. 

B (Beta) wave 
e [tis the wave of awake person with eyes opened (adult during brain activity). 
e Site of recording: parietal and frontal regions. 
eo Amplitude: 25 pv 
e Frequency: 13-30 cycles / sec. 

0 (Theta) wave 
o |tis the wave of children and adults during light sleep and emotional stress. 
e Site of recording: temporal and partial region. 
eo Amplitude: 100 pv. 
e Frequency: 4-7 cycles/sec. 

o (Delta) wave 
e [tis wave of deep sleep, infants and in cases of brain damage and surgical anesthesia. 

Site: all cortical areas (they originate from cortical neurons). 
Amplitude: 100 pv. 
Frequency: less than 3.5 cycles/sec. 

vy (Gamma} wave 
e [tis wave of: Hyperaroused, higher mental activity and processing complex tasks 
e Site: all cortical areas 

349 



Ee EEE EB 55 l= == = NR NR] | 

CHAPTER Vi: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

eo Amplitude: 0.5-2 pv. 
e Frequency: 30-80 Hz 

Value of EEG 
It is non invasive clinical test for investigating the function of brain. 
o Localization of brain tumors. 
o Diagnosis of epilepsy. 
o Monitor of sleep stages and diagnosis of sleep disorders. 
o Indicates brain death (flat EEG). 

Alpha block 
e When a subject attention is focused on something, the regular alpha rhythm is 

replaced by the fast irregular low-voltage beta rhythm. 
e This phenomenon is called alpha block. Another term for this phenomenon is the 

arousal or alerting response, because it is correlated with the aroused, alert state. It . 
has also been called desynchronization. 
It is due to stimulation of ascending reticular activating system (ARAS). 

Sleep & Arousal 

Consciousness: is the awareness of both: 
1- Self. 
2- One’s surroundings, thoughts and feeling. 

Sleep: It is a state of unconsciousness from which person can be aroused by sensory or motor 
stimuli. 

Coma: it is a state of unconsciousness from which the person cannot be aroused 

Function of sleep 
1. Provides the brain with time to restore biochemical or physiological processes that have 

progressively decreased during wakefulness. 
a. Cognition 
b. Maintain metabolic-caloric balance. . 
¢. Thermal equilibrium. 
d. Immune competence. 

2. Facilitation of learning and memory. 
3. Neural maturation. 

Types of sleep 
Sleep is classified into two types that follow each other in a cyclic manner during sleep. 

1- Slow wave sleeps (non- rapid eye movement sleep= nonREM=NREM). 
2- Rapid eye movements sleep (REM). 

Slow Wave Sleep 
Timing: Usually sleep starts by this type, it occupies most of the sleeping duration (75%) of 
total sleeping hours in adults. It is deeper and longer early in night. 

Stages: 
As one goes to sleep, the alpha waves characteristics of drowsiness appear. This is followed 
by four stages characterized by progressively low frequency and high amplitude: 

350 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 

sleep & epilepsy 

v' Stage 1: Sleep is very light (theta waves) (5%—10% of total sleep cycle). 
v' Stage 2: Sleep is light (sleep spindles (bursts of large alpha waves 12-14 Hz) and K 

complexes (large and slow potential) are seen within theta waves). (40%—50% of total 

sleep cycle) 
v' Stage 3: Sleep is moderate (delta waves (3-3.5 Hz). 
v' Stage 4: Sleep is deepest (delta waves with least frequency (0.5-1.5 Hz). 
v' Stages 3 & 4 represent (10%—20% of total sleep cycle) 

Importance 
Physical rest (increases when person is tired) 

Characteristics 
1. No rapid eye movements. Eye deviates up and miosed. 

. Sleep talking and walking are present. 

. No dreams (dreams that occur are not remembered). 

. Decreased pulse, blood pressure respiration and basal metabolic rate (by about 10-30 %) 
due to increase parasympathetic activity. 

. Increased growth hormone. 

. Skeletal muscle tone is slightly inhibited. 

. Easy arousal: threshold of arousal is low. 

. Penile erection and teeth grinding are absent. 
Rapid Eye Movement Sleep (REM) 
Timing: It follows non REM sleep. In a normal night of sleep, bouts of REM sleep lasting 5 to 
30 minutes usually appear on the average every 90 minutes. It is repeated 4-6 times/ night. 
It occupies 25% of sleep hours in adults. REM sleep occupies 80% of total sleep time in 
premature infants and 50% in fullterm neonates. It decreases by age (20% of sleep hours), 
fatigue and increases by rest. 

Importance 
Mental rest. 

Characteristic 
1. Rapid eye movement. 
2. Dreams that are remembered. 
3. Marked decrease in muscle tone indicating strong inhibition of the spinal muscle control 

areas. 
4, Large body movements do not occur; however, movements of smaller muscles can occur 

(fingers, toes, legs, wrists). 
5. Irregular or increased pulse, blood pressure and respiration (increased sympathetic 

activity). 
. Penile erection and teeth grinding are present. 
. Decreased growth hormone. 
. Sleep talking and walking are absent. 
. Person is difficult to be aroused: threshold of arousal is high, yet people spontaneously 
awake in the morning during an episode of REM sleep. 

351 

DO 00 dO oo ~ OY Un WN 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

EEG changes: 
One stage. 
Rapid irregular low voltage B waves like AWAKE vol sah VY nr pr AE ABI S40 PT 7 

that in alert state (desynchronized beta Calm tolnder As rtap J tn, 
rhythm). This type of sleep is also called Wakefulness 

Theta Waves 
paradoxical sleep because it indicates Stage 1 Aviw Waal nhea sao SP glippires 
marked brain activity, but person is still Theta Waves 

i 

asleep. Slaep Spindle complex 4 

Stage2 ry \W EAN 1g 
Distribution of Sleep Stages Sleep Spindles F' 

& K Complexes | 
- In a typical night of sleep, a young ¢ 4 

adult first enters NREM sleep, for 
od HY VESEY S IRN Lait 

about 70-100 min (average 90 min.), 
then a REM period follows. Della Waves 

- This cycle is repeated, and sleep then 
REM SIBER ver dive mV aM sme Arbre An 

lightens with shorter NREM sleep and 
longer REM sleep. There is less stage Fig. 6.12: EEG changes during awake and 

3 and 4 sleep and more REM sleep sleep states 

toward morning. There are 4-6 sleep 
cycles per night. 

- Children have more total sleep time (8=10 h) compared to most adults (about 6 h). 
Physiology of consciousness (wakefulness) 

- Certain areas of the brainstem; midbrain reticular formation (the RAS) and hypothalamus 
promote wakefulness by sending excitation signals to the cerebral cortex. Thus, the 
cortex is activated, and we stay awake. Consciousness is maintained by +ve feedback 
mechanism through re-excitation of RAS by signals discharged from the activated cortex 
via corticofugal fibers. 

- After wakefulness for many hours occurs, sleep tends to occur due to: 
a. Fatigue of neurons in RAS so the +ve feedback cycle between RAS and cerebral cortex 

fades. 
b. Spontaneous activation of sleep centers which inhibit arousal promoting neurons. 

- Then during the sleeping hours arousal promoting neurons regain their excitability and 
the sleep centers become less excitable. 

Mechanism of sleep 
1. Passive theory of sleep 

o The reticular activating system is simply fatigued during the waking day and became 
inactive as a result. 

o However, this view was changed recently. 
2. Active theory of sleep 

o Sleep is caused by stimulation of several specific areas of the brain (sleep centers). 
I. Centers that lead to non- REM sleep: 

- Anterior hypothalamus and adjacent basal forebrain area 
Il. Centers that lead to REM sleep: 

- Reticular formation in upper part of brain stem contains acetylcholine 
secreting neurons = REM sleep by discharging cholinergic signals directly to 
cerebral cortex. 

352 

—-  ee — reoy  — 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 

sleep & epilepsy 

* The suprachiasmatic nucleus of hypothalamus synchronizes the sleep / wakefulness 
rhythm with dark light cycle. 

Neurochemical Mechanisms Promoting Sleep and Arousal 
v" Transitions between sleep and wakefulness manifest a circadian rhythm consisting of an 

average of 6-8 h of sleep and 16-18 h of wakefulness. 
v' Nuclei in both the brain stem and hypothalamus are critical for the transitions between 

these states of consciousness. 
v' The RAS and posterior hypothalamus produce the alerting response and arousal. 
v' The anterior hypothalamus and adjacent basal forebrain region induce sleep. 
v' The reticular formation is composed of several groups of neurons: locus coeruleus 

neurons release norepinephrine, raphe nuclei neurons release serotonin and pontine 
reticular formation neurons release acetylcholine. 

vIn the case of the forebrain neurons involved in control of the sleep-wake cycles, 
preoptic neurons in the hypothalamus release GABA and posterior hypothalamic 
neurons (tuberomamilary neurons) release histamine. 

v' Also, orexin is produced in lateral hypothalamic neurons and appear to be important in 
switching between sleep and wakefulness. 

v' One theory regarding the basis for transitions from sleep to wakefulness involves 
alternating reciprocal activity of different groups of RAS neurons. 

v It assumes that wakefulness and REM sleep are at opposite extremes. 
v" When the activity of norepinephrine- and serotonin-containing neurons {locus coeruleus 

and raphe nuclei) is dominant, there is a reduced level of activity in acetylcholine- 
containing neurons in the pontine reticular formation. This pattern of activity contributes 
to the appearance of the awake state. 

v’ The reverse of this pattern leads to REM sleep. 
v' When there is a more even balance in the activity of the aminergic and cholinergic 

neurons, NREM sleep occurs. 
v' The orexin released from hypothalamic neurons may regulate the changes in activity in 

these brainstem neurons. 
vIn addition, an increased release of GABA and reduced release of histamine increase the 

likelihood of NREM sleep via deactivation of the thalamus and cortex. 
v' Wakefulness occurs when GABA release is reduced and histamine release is increased 

353 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 

sleep & epilepsy 

Fig. 6.13: Neurochemical mechanisms promoting sleep and arousal 

3. Metabolic theory of sleep: 
o Itis possible that prolonged wakefulness causes progressive accumulation of a sleep 

factor or factors in the brain stem or in the cerebrospinal fluid that lead to sleep. 
o A lipid produced by brain is said to have sleep-inducing properties. Several 

investigators have argued that a peptide produced in the brain is responsible for 
sleep. Muramyl peptide, a low molecular weight substance was found to accumulate 
in the cerebrospinal fluid and urine of animals kept awake for several days. 

354 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 

sleep & epilepsy 

ANXIOLYTIC AND SEDATIVE HYPNOTICS 
They are drugs used mainly in treatment of anxiety and insomnia. 

Classification According to Mechanism of Action 

I. Drugs Facilitating GABA Action Il. 5-HT1a Ill. Melatonin 

e Barbiturates Agonist/Partial (MT: & MT) 

° Benzodiszepines (B20) Agonist Receptor Agonists 
e Z-hypnotic e.g. Zolpidem 
e Alcohol e Buspirone e Ramelteon 

Other Drugs with sedative-hypnotic Effects 
e Antidepressants e.g. Mirtazapine, TCA as Amitriptyline. 
e Antipsychotics e.g. Quetiapine, Clozapine, Olanzapine. 
e Antihistamines e.g. diphenhydramine 
N.B. B-Blockers e.g. Propranolol (used in anxiety to redue tachycardia & tremors) 

GABA 

GABA 

Benzodiazepines 
Flumazenil 

‘pIe  __— Zolpidem 
we|  

lon channel 

Fig. 6.14: Structure and Ligands of GABA A receptor! (Katzung 15 ed. 2021) 

! GABA Receptors (inhibitory receptors) 
GABA, receptors: mediate postsynaptic neuronal inhibition. 
GABA; receptors!: Metabotropic (G-protein linked): Presynaptic neuronal inhibition by inhibiting Ca? 
influx => inhibition of release of the excitatory neurotransmitter glutamate. Postsynaptic neuronal 
inhibition by 1 K* outflux =» hyperpolarization. 

355 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

Reading only 
GABA, Receptor Cl- ion Channel Complex 

eo The GABAx receptor is a pentamer formed of 3 different types of subunits 
(two a, two 3 & one ¥) surrounding a Cl ion channel. 

e The GABA binding site is at the interface between a and 8 subunits. 
e Barbiturates bind to a site near the Cl" channel distinct from the BZDs site. 
e BZD binding site is on y subunit or an area on the a subunit regulated by y 

subunit. Common BZ receptor subtypes in the CNS are designated as BZ; or 
BZ; depending on whether the binding site includes an ai or a; subunit, 
respectively. 

e a; subunit is associated with sedation/hypnosis. 
e a; subunit has greater anxiolytic and muscle relaxation actions. 

Mechanism of action of drugs acting at GABA-A receptor 
¢ Binding of GABA to its binding site between a and B subunits of GABA- A receptor opens 

a CI channel with influx of CI" resulting in hyperpolarization —inhibit neuronal firing. 
¢ Binding of drugs, Barbiturates BZDs or Zolpidem, to their sites on the GABA- A receptor 

complex =» T affinity of GABA to bind to its receptors. This increases opening of CI 
channel facilitating the inhibitory effects of GABA. 

Barbiturates 

e More powerful CNS depressants than BZDs because barbiturates have direct GABA- 
mimetic effects and inhibitory effects on glutamate receptors (AMPA-R) in high 
concentrations?. Formerly used as sedative-hypnotics but largely replaced by BZDs due to: 
1. Narrow therapeutic index (BZDs are safer) 

Barbiturates induce a dose-dependent CNS depression: sedation (at low doses), 
hypnosis (at higher doses) & anesthesia, coma, cardiovascular & respiratory 
depression = death (toxic doses). 

2. sNpo ecific antidote is available for barbiturates whereas, flumazenil is a specific BZD 
antagonist. 

3. Drug dependence is greater with barbiturates than with BZDs. 
4. Enzyme induction occurs with barbiturates but not with BZDs =» drug interactions. 
5. Acute porphyria® may be precipitated by barbiturates in susceptible patients. 

Members of Barbiturates 
Long-acting: phenobarbital (antiepileptic). 
Short-acting: pentobarbital, secobarbital (sedative-hypnotic). Replaced by BZD. 

“barbiturates in high concentrations have direct Block Na channel. 
3 Porphyrias are caused by deficiencies of specific enzymes of the heme biosynthetic pathwa—y  accumulations 

of toxic heme precursors; protoporphyrins) — skin or neurological complications. Barbiturates induce ALA 
synthetase enzyme responsible for synthests of the porphynns which accumulate since the enzymes 
responsible for their conversion into heme are defective. 

356 



CHAPTER VI. DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 

sleep & epilepsy 

Ultrashort-acting: thiopental {IV anesthetic). 

Benzodiazepines (BZDs) 
o BZDs are the most widely used anxiolytics and sedative hypnotics. 

Classification of BZDs according to duration of action® 
1. Long acting (> 20 hours) 

Diazepam (prototype), Clonazepam 
2. Intermediate => short acting (6-20 hours) 

Alprazolam® , Lorazepam’: 
3. Ultrashort-acting (< 6 hours) 

Midazolam 

Pharmacological Actions & Uses of BZDs 

= = = V 
I. Anxiolytic Il. Sedative {low dose) ll. Anesthetic 

Euphoric Hypn(ohigth diosce) 

Potentiate GABA in Potentiate GABA in - Amnesia & sedation. 
limbic system brainstem reticular - Potentiate narcotics. 

formation Uses 
Uses Uses 1. Conscious sedation. 

1- Anxiety disorders || 1. insomnia: 2. Pre-anesthesia. 
e.g. Alprazolam, - Promote sleep onset 3. Balanced 

Clonazepam. - T stage 2 of NREM anesthesia, as 
2. Nightmares: (J, REM adjuncts. 

2- Panic Disorder sleep) e.g. Midazolam 
e.g. Alprazolam 3. Night terrors: 

J Stage 3,4 of NREM 
sleep. e.g. short and 
intermediate acting BZD 

IV. Anticonvulsant || V. Skeletal Mucle Relaxant VI. Others 
(Antiepileptic) {at spinal & supraspinal (Both Alcohol and 

levels) BZD Potentiate ABA) 

Uses Uses Uses 
1. Epilepsy Muscle Spasticity in || Alcohol withdrawal < 

> e.g. Clonazepam inflammation -trauma, (alcohol is replaced 
2. Status epilepticus || cerebral palsy, MS. by a longer acting 

e.g. Lorazepam, || e.g. Diazepam BZD =» smoother 
Diazepam (1% line) withdrawal 

e.g. Diazepam 
————— 

* Bromazepam (Calmepam) is intermediate acting (t1/2 ~ 17 hrs) BZD used anxiety & insomnia. 
* Duration of action of diazepam is 24- 48 hours. 
® Duration of action of alprazolam is 24 hours 
" Duration of action of of lorazepam is 14 hours. No active metabolite thus also used as a hypnotic. 

357 



CHAPTER VI DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

Adverse Effects 
1. Drowsiness — confusion - 4 cognitive function® - hangover®. 
2. Amnesia (anterograde). 
3. Ataxia & 4 motor skills => difficulty in driving & 1 risk of falls in elderly. 
4. Abuse (tolerance & dependence; so not used more than 4-6 weeks). 
5. Additive CNS depression with alcohol and other CNS depressants. 
6. Withdrawal of hypnotics =*rebound insomnia®®. (So, needs gradual withdrawal) 

Toxicity of Benzodiazepines 

- Prolonged sleep. and Respiratory & cardiovascular depression!! (rare except if given 
rapidly IV or with other CNS depressants). 

- Treated by Antidote: Flumazenil (Competitive BZDs receptor antagonist) 

Z- Hypnotics e.g. Zolpidem, Eszopiclone'? (Night Calm): “Selective Hypnotic” 
Non-BZDs acting on BZD; receptor (hypnosis) and can be antagonized by flumazenil. 

Advantages of zolpidem over BZDs (less side effects) 
1. Rapid onset. 2. Less cognitive impairment. 
3. Less hangover. 4. Less tolerance & dependence. 5. Less suppression of REM sleep? 

Ramelteon: “Selective Hypnotic” 
Hypnotic; agonist at MT: & MT, melatonini4 receptors in the brain. 
{ Latency to persistent sleep-> useful in patients with difficulty in falling asleep. 
Minimal abuse potential (not a controlled substance): no withdrawal symptoms or 

rebound insomnia. 
Side effects?2: dizziness, somnolence and fatigue. 

Buspirone: “Selective anxiolytic” Used in Chronic Anxiety 

Mech: Agonist/partial agonist at 5-HT14 {mechanism not fully understood). 

-Differs from BZD: negligible sedation, no hypnotic, anticonvulsant or muscle relaxation. 

Advantages (devoid BZD side effects): No amnesia or 4 cognitive function, or additive CNS 
depression with alcohol or other sedatives. No ataxia or reduction of psychomotor skills. 
No abuse (delayed onset & dysphoria), useful in patients liable to abuse. 

Disadvantages: 1. Delayed onset (2 weeks to act). 2. Does not treat insomnia or panic attacks. 

8 Ability to understand, think , learn & judge . 
® Drowsiness, mental & motor depression (residual sedation) occur on day following drug intake. 
'9 Shortening of REM sleep = anterograde amnesia, anxiety & imitability, followed by rebound increase with 

nightmares on withdrawal. May occur in same night with short acting agents. 
'! May depress vital centers in infants (passes in milk) or in neonates if given in pre-delivery period. 
'2 Duration of action of Eszopiclone 7-8 hours. (It has risk of abuse and addiction). 
13 Does not shorten REM sleep as BZD thus no REM rebound ocurrs on stopping the drug. 
14 Melatonin hormone of the pineal gland maintains circadian rhythm of normal sleep -wake cycle. 

358 



= — ee - - - A= — Tp ald oT — 

CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

GENERAL ANESTHETCS 

General anesthetics are drugs used in surgery to induce reversible loss of consciousness, 
analgesia, amnesia, skeletal muscle relaxation & inhibition of visceral reflexes. 

Balanced Anesthesia 
Balanced anesthesia is used to achieve all requirements for general anesthesia & to 
minimize adverse effects of individual drugs. It includes: 

1. Preanesthetic medication: preoperative administration of sedatives, opioid analgesics, 
anti-muscarinics, anti-emetics and H1& H2 antagonists aiming to: 
a. Induce amnesia, 4 anxiety & facilitating induction of anesthesia. 
b. Suppress autonomic reflexes, ¢ salivary & bronchial secretion, {gastric acidity. 
c. Potentiate weak anesthetics. 

2. IV anesthetics (for rapid induction) plus succinylcholine (for intubation). 
3. Inhalation anesthetics (for maintenance) & NMBs (if needed) in operation. 

Classification of General Anesthetics 

: 3 
I. Inhalation Anesthetics il. IV Anesthetics 
{Mainly for Maintenance) (Mainly for Induction) 

e Slow; provide minute to minute e Rapid induction of anesthesia 
control over depth of anesthesia 

e Nitrous oxide (Nz0). A. Barbiturates 
e Halogenated agents: Thiopental sodium 

e Halothane - Isoflurane. B. Non-barbiturates 
—" ee Desflurane- Sevoflurane. e Propofol - Ketamine. 

¢ Opioids- Benzodiazepines. 

Mechanism of Action of General Anesthetic 

General anesthetics inhibit neuronal activity in many brain regions, specially the midbrain, 
reticular activating system & thalamus. 

Mechanism of Nestronal inhibition1® 

! ¥ 
e Facilitation of inhibitory effects of GABA at e [nhibition of excitatory effects 

GABAA receptor: of glutamate at NMDA 
a Halogenated inhalation agents. receptor: 
a Propofol. a Ketamine 
a Barbiturates - Benzodiazepines. Q Nitrous oxide 

' other receptors involved: nicotinic Ach receptors & glycine receptors. 

359 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

I. Inhalation Anesthetics’ 

MAC (measures potency): 
e MAC is the minimum alveolar concentraton of anesthetic gas resulting in immobility in 

50 % of patients when exposed to a painful stimulus e.g. a surgical skin incision. 
e MAC is J by anesthetic adjuvants as opioids, sedatives hypnotics , clonidine, and in 

elderly patients. it is 4* by drugs increasing catecholamines & by alcohol abuse. 

A. Halogenated agents 
Halothane 

Inhalation anesthetic for maintenance anesthesia. 
May also be used for induction (nonirritant; smooth & pleasant). 
Weak analgesic effect = combined with N2O (powerful analgesic). 

¢ Medium rate of induction & recovery. 

Adverse Effects of halothane®® 
1. Hypotension: due to myocardial depression or VD. 
2. Heart: bradycardia - arrhythmia (sensitize myocardium to catecholamines). 
3. Hepatotoxicl®. 
4. Malignant Hyperthermia. 

Specific features of newer halogenated agents compared to halothane 

e Due to hepatotoxicity, halothane is replaced by newer agents, which may also 
induce CVS & respiratory depression & malignant hyperthermia but less than 
halothane. 

Isoflurane 
eo May precipitate ischemia in patient with coronary disease. 
e Respiratory irritant=>» cough & laryngospasm. 

Desflurane 
e Faster onset & recovery = suitable for day surgery. 
e Respiratory irritant =» cough & laryngospasm. 

Sevoflurane 
e No respiratory irritation—> preferred inhalation agent for induction of anesthesia 

specially in children. 
oe Degraded by contact with soda lime to the nephrotoxic "compound A". 

17 Induction & Recovery of inhalation anesthetics 
Rapid induction & recovery allow flexible control of depth of anesthesia. 

® Speed of induction & recovery depends on: 
1. Solubility in blood (blood: gas partition coefficient): agents with low solubility coefficient = 

rapid induction & recovery, e.g., NoO =0.47, desflurane = 0.42. 
11. Fat solubility: agents with high lipid solubility accumulate in fat => long hangover if used for a 

prolonged operation. 
'S Adverse effects of halothane: respiratory depression - § mucociliary function -uterine relaxation= 

bleeding - PICT (cerebral VD) ->dangerous in head injury & cerebral tumors. 
'" Hepatic metabolism —trifluoroacetic acid which reacts with liver proteins— immune response. 

360 

aaa Ys" 



— —— 

CHAPTER VIL DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 

sleep & epilepsy 

B. Nitrous Oxide (N.O) 
Rapid onset & recovery. 
Low potency: used for maintenance anesthesia, not alone, but in combination with 
other inhalation agents to \ their side effects & 1* their analgesic effects. 
Effective analgesic: can be used alone in subanesthetic doses in brief procedures; e.g. 
dental outpatient clinic - obstetric analgesia. 
Safest inhalation agent: less cardiac or respiratory depression - less uterine relaxation - 
no hepatitis - no malignant hyperthermia. 

Adverse Effects of N.O*° 
1. Expands closed gas spaces = pressure in middle ear — Cl: in bowel obstruction & 

pneumothorax. 
2. Hypoxia on prolonged use (mixed with O; = 50 - 70 % nitrous oxide). 
3. Abuse: euphoria (laughing gas). 
4. Megaloblastic anemia & abortion (chronic exposure of operating room staff). 

Il. INTRAVENOUS ANESTHETICS 

A. Ultra-Short-Acting Barbiturates: 
Thiopental 
Kinetics 
- Rapid onset due to rapid crossing of BBB (highly lipid soluble). 
- Short acting; redistributes from brain to fat & skeletal muscle. 
- Slowly metabolized & liable to accumulate in body fat, thus may cause prolonged 

effect if given repeatedly =» toxicity. 
Clinical Uses 
1. Most widely used IV anesthetic for induction followed by maintenance with 

inhalation agents for major operations (the principal use). 
2. Given alone in anesthesia for short procedures. 
Adverse Effects (narrow safety margin) 
1. Respiratory & cardiovascular depression (toxic doses). 
2. Severe vasospasm if accidentally injected intra-arterially = gangrene. 
3. Can precipitate porphyria. 

B. Nonbarbiturate IV Anesthetics 
1. Propofol 

eo Widely used IV anesthetic for induction & maintenance of anesthesia. 
e Rapid induction & recovery (rapid distribution) => given as IV bolus or infusion 

without maintenance by inhalation agent =» useful in one day surgery. 
e Used in conscious?! & deep?? sedation (in intensive care). 

Advantage: antiemetic (¥ risk of postoperative vomiting). 
e Disadvantage: respiratory & CVS depression — pain at injection site. 

™ There is a controversy about an increase in postoperative nausea & vomiting with nitrous oxide. 
I Amnesia, sedation & analgesia without complete loss of consciousness; patient responds to commands 
22 State of ¥ consciousness, indistinguishable from general anaesthesia. 

361 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

2. Ketamine 
Short-acting IV? anesthetic =» dissociative anesthesia?® (hypnotic state with 
dissociation, amnesia & analgesia; patients are unresponsive to commands). 
Induces profound analgesia =» used for dressings of burns & minor orthopedic 
procedures in children. 
CV stimulant (? HR & BP) =» used in poor risk patients (shock states). 
Potent bronchodilator?® =» suitable for patients with 4 risk for bronchospasm. 
Disadvantages 
e 1 Cerebral blood flow & intracranial tension =» avoid in head injuries. 
e Hallucination & disorientation (emergence phenomenon) occur on recovery 
(avoided by pretreatment with diazepam). 

3. Benzodiazepines (midazolam - diazepam - lorazepam) 
Midazolam is preferred due to its rapid & short action & it’s less irritant effect. 
Commonly used for sedation rather than anesthesia because prolonged amnesia & 
sedation may result from anesthetic doses. Used in. 
1- Conscious sedation ( for minor procedures e.g. endoscopy) 
2- Pre-anesthesia. 
3. Balanced anesthesia, anesthetic adjuncts. 

Availability of the antidote, flumazenil, is an advantage in case of toxicity 
(respiratory depression). 

4. Opioid Analgesics (see before) 
e¢ Fentanyl, sufentanyl, alfentanyl, remifentanyl & morphine. 

N.B.: Total intravenous anesthesia may be produced by combining opioids with 
propofol rather than an inhalation agent. 

2 Ketamine may also be given IM. 
* Patients may have their eyes open, move their limbs involuntarily & breathe spontaneously. 
“Ketamine is less respiratory depressant than other anesthetics 

362 



, —— he 
e—r ————— ————A— — 

CHAPTER Vi: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

LOCAL ANESTHETICS 

Definition 
e A local anesthetic (LA) is a drug that induces a reversible loss of sensation in a localized 

area of the body without inducing loss of consciousness or sleep. 

Table 6.1.Classification of local anesthesia 

I. Esters ll. Amides 
Connecting group is an "ester Connecting group is an "amide 

Hydrolyzed by plasma pseudocholine Metabolized by liver: 
esterases: 1. Longer duration of action. 
1. Shorter duration of action. 2. liable to induce systemic toxicity. 
2. liable to allergy (PABA derivatives). 3. Duration of action prolonged in 
3. Duration of action is prolonged in liver disease & reduced hepatic 

genetic enzyme deficiency. blood flow (e.g. heart failure). 

Procaine Short acting (30- 60 minutes). Lidocaine Intermediate acting (2 h). 

Benzocaine Bupivacaine Long duration (3 h) 

Cocaine (limited use due to abuse potential). | Ropivacaine 

Mechanism of Action of LA 

e LA bind to receptors on inner surface of Na channel in nerve membranes resulting in their 
blockade =» inhibition of generation & propagation of action potential. 

Factors Affecting Sensitivity of Nerves to LA 
1. Rate of firing: =» more effective in rapid-firing nerves (sensory). 
2. Nerve size: small nerve fibers conducting pain, temperature & autonomic activity are 

more sensitive to LA than large fibers conducting pressure & motor impulses (with higher 
concentrations motor nerves become affected). 

pH and Local Anesthetic Activity 
e LAs are weak bases (pKa between 7.7 and 9). In order to increase their solubility and 

stability they are prepared as acid salts (e.g. lidocaine HCI). 
e The local anesthetic exists in 2 forms in equilibrium according to its pKa & to the 

extracellular pH: 
1. Ionized form 
2. Unionized form. 

e¢ Only the unionized form can cross the nerve membrane to block Na* channel’. 

26 Other mechanism of action: LAs dissolve in neuronal membrane and induce swelling of membrane 
&physical inactivation of Na channel. 

*" blockade of Na" channels by LA is use-dependent, i.e. they block Na* channels that are in activated 
(open) & deactivated states more than those in resting state =» more effective in rapid-firing nerves 
(sensory). 

363 



| 
CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 

sleep & epilepsy 

Extracellular | 

ionized « » Unionized 

- 
Lipid bilayer Na channel 

as 
Vo 

Unionized «>» Ionized 
intracellular 

ionized form, cation unionized form, free | 
water soluble base lipid soluble 

Fig. 6.15: Effect of extracellular Ph on the action of Local anesthesia 

Factors affecting activity of local anesthetics 
1. Plasma protein binding: affects duration of action 

Bupivacaine is 95% bound to plasma proteins thus longer acting than lidocaine (65%). 
2. Lipid solubility: affects potency 

The more lipid soluble the drug is the greater its potency. Bupivacaine is 7 times more 
lipid soluble than lidocaine therefore more potent. 

3. PKa of drug: affects speed of onset. 
The lower the PKa the greater the speed of onset since more drug will be non-ionized 
and can cross nerve membrane. Lidocaine (PKa 7.9; 25% non-ionized) acts more rapidly 
than bupivacaine ( PKa 8.1; 15% non-ionized). 

4. Extracellular pH®® 
Infections or repeated injections of lidocaine Hel = 1 extracellular acidity = 71 
extracellular ionized form of LA =>{ LA crossing =>4 activity. 
Adding NaHCO; to LA solution = { extracellular acidity = 1 extracellular unionized 
form=> 1 LA crossing => 1 activity (rapid onset). 

5. Addition of vasoconstrictors: prolongs duration of action. 
e LAs (except cocaine) induce VD => 1 absorption => termination of effect & 1 risk of 
systemic toxicity. 

e Vasoconstrictors are added to LA (except cocaine) to ¢ absorption = % duration & 
J systemic toxicity. 

Precautions 

e Vasoconstrictors are Cli n anesthesia of fingers, toes & nose =» gangrene. 
e Felypressin is preferred in cardiac patients (no effect on HR & BP). 

28 Intracellular pH 
Carbonated solutions of LA have a rapid onset since they are saturated with CO, which readily enters 
nerve cells =>1 intracellular acidity =% intracellular ionized (active) form available to block Na” 
channel. 

PLocal anesthesia is also not preferred in infections to avoid spread of infection. 

364 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

Adverse Effects &Toxicity ( T systemic absorption or accidental IV injection) 
1. CNS: Low concentration: Sleepiness- restlessness- numbness — metallic taste. 

High concentration (stimulation followed by depression) 
e¢ Tremors — convulsions3? - respiratory depression - coma - death. 

2. Neurotoxicity: due to the direct local effect of high concentration of LA injected close to 
nerve trunks or spinal cord. 

3. CVS: hypotension (due to vasodilation) & bradycardia. 
Bupivacaine is extremely cardiotoxic in high doses3*. 

4. Allergy: with esters that are derivatives of PABA e.g. procaine. 
5. Side effects of vasoconstrictor added to LA (1 BP & arrhythmia). 

Uses & Administration 
1. Surface anesthesia (for minor surgeries): 

e Applied to skin & mucous membranes of nose, mouth & cornea as a solution, jelly or 
cream. e.g. lidocaine? (1% choice due to rapid penetration) 

2. Infiltration (for minor surgery): 
¢ [Injected sc & in submucosal tissues to reach nerve branches & terminals. 

3. Nerve black (for dentistry & surgery): 
e Injected close to nerve trunks (e.g. dental nerves - brachial plexus). 

4. lV regional anesthesia: 
® A double cuff is applied to the arm & inflated above arterial BP & the LA is injected IV 
after elevation of arm to drain the venous system. 

5. Spinal anesthesia: 
e |njected in subarachnoid space below L;, acts on spinal roots & spinal cord. 
e Used for surgery of abdomen, pelvis & legs when general anesthesia is 
contraindicated. 

Side effects: 
Headache (due to CSF leakage & traction on sensitive structures, avoided by use of pencil 
point needles). 
- Hypotension (sympathetic nerve block). - Spinal root injury. - Infection. 

6. Epidural anesthesia: 
¢ [njected outside the dura, blocks spinal roots. 
¢ Same indications as spinal anesthesia with ¥ risk of side effects. 

*’ Diazepam may be given as premedication or to terminate convulsions if they occur. 
*! Ropivacaine: amide with long duration of action. More selective on sensory than motor nerves. Less 

cardiotoxic than bupivacaine. 
-Ropivacaine is More selective on sensory than on motor nerves 

**Procain is not used for surface anesthesia as it has Slow tissue penetration 
Lidocaine may be used also in neuropathic pain. 

Drug interactions 
e Lidocaine x propranolol: Propranolol by reducing hepatic blood flow impairs clearance of 

lidocaine=>toxicity. 
¢ Lidocaine with adrenaline x propranolol=> dangerous rise in BP due to unopposed alpha action of 

adrenaline. 
e Lidocaine with adrenaline x tricyclic antidepressants—> hypertensive crisis. 

365 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

eo Commonly used in obstetrics for painless labor. 

DRUG THERAPY OF EPILEPSY AND MIGRAINE 

Definition of Epilepsy*3: 
Chronic disease characterized by repeated attacks (2 or more seizures with at least 24 
hours apart) of abnormal electrical discharge of cerebral neurons resulting in EEG, motor, 
sensory, autonomic or psychological changes. 

Etiology 
A. Primary epilepsy (unknown cause, i.e. idiopathic). 
B. Secondary epilepsy caused by: 

1. Trauma, meningitis, brain tumors, fevers, hypoglycemia. 
2. Drugs: insulin (hypoglycemia) - TCAs — cocaine- antipsychotics — Li*. 

Classification of Epilepsy 
Epilepsy is caused by a group of hyper excitable neurons with excessive electrical discharge 
which might be localized (partial) or spread (generalized). 
The major types of epilepsy: 

|. Generalized epilepsy: Tonic-Clonic, Absence, Myoclonic ...... 
Il. Partial epilepsy: Simple partial, Complex partial. 

Antiepileptic Drugs 
Members 

I. Classic agents (major or older agents) 
Phenytoin (prototype) — carbamazepine — valproate (valproic acid) - ethosuximide. 
Phenobarbital - benzodiazepines. 

Il. Newer agents®® 
e Lamotrigine — levetiracetam — oxcarbazepine. 
eo Topiramate — gabapentin- pregabalin. 

Mechanism of Action 
Anti-epileptics block initiation or spread of seizures by | hyper-excitability of cerebral 
neurons by acting on neurotransmitters or by blocking ion channels. 
Most antiepileptic drugs act by more than one mechanism: 

1. Blockade of Na* Channels **2{ repetitive firing of neurons 
e Phenytoin — carbamazepine — valproate. 
e Topiramate - lamotrigine. 

2. Blockade of T- type Ca** Channels in thalamus => 4 brain rhythmic activity {effective 
in absence seizures) 

e Ethosuximide. 
eo Valproate. 

3. Blockade of presynaptic voltage gated Ca™ Channels — J glutamate release 

33 Convulsion is an abnormal, involuntary contraction of the muscles most typically seen with certain seizure 
disorders (Motor Seizure). 
34 Divalproex = sodium valproate + valproic acid that is converted to valproate ion when it reaches the GIT 
tract. It improves GIT tolerance of Valproic acid. 
Newer agents: lacosamide - zonisamide- rufinamide- felbamate, vigabatrin- tiagabine, preampenel. 
*¢ Other Na channel blockers: lacosamide - zonisamide- rufinamide. 

366 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

e Lamotrigine. 

e Gabapentin ~ pregabalin. 
4. Binding to vesicle protein VS2A—-> modify release of glutamate 

e Levetiracetam. 
5. NMDA glutamate receptor antagonists?’ 

e Valproate. 
6. Effects on GABA 

i. Facilitate GABA Action: phenobarbital =benzodiazepines ~topiramate. 
ii. AN GABA Level’: valproate increase GABA turnover. 

KCONQ . 
Na®  Na*(Ca®)  K° channel C¥ 

inhibitory synapse Excitatory synapse 

Not illustrated: 
vemaby « Vigabalrin — GABA degradation Inhibit transaminase 

and drugs with multiple mechanisms. 
» Valproate — 1GABA turnover, | Na‘ channels, NMDA receptors 
 Topiramale —» |Na’ channels, |AMPA/kainate receptors, { GABA, receptors 

Fig. 6.16: Mechanism of Action of major antiepileptic drugs 

>’ Other NMDA antagonists: felbamate, preampenel. 
¥ Tiagabin: inhibits GABA uptake, vigabatrin inhibits GABA breakdown by transaminase. And 
Valproate & Gabapentin Tturnover mainly via TGAD (synthesis) 
Acetazolamide: Antiepileptic effect is due to metabolic acidosis, but tolerance occurs. 

367 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

Table 6.2 Choice of Antiepileptic Drugs in Different Types of Epilepsy) 

e Partial? e Tonic- clonic? e Absence e Myoclonic* 

e First line 

e Carbamazepine. e Valproate. o Ethosuximide. ¢ Valproate. 
e Lamotrigine. e Lamotrigine. e Valproate. 

eo Alternatives 

e | evetiracetam. . Carbamazepine. ¢ Lamotrigine. ® Levetiracetam. 

e Valproate. e Oxcarbazepine. ¢ Topiramate. 
e Oxcarbazepine. e Levetiracetam. 

e Valproate is preferred to ethosuximide if tonic- clonic or myoclonic seizures coexist. 
e Phenytoin is used in parial & generalized tonic-clonic (due to troublesome 

pharmacokinetics & cosmetic disturbances, other agents are prefferred). 
eo Due to sedation & tolerance, phenobarbital & BZD are used mainly in acute fits & in status 

epilepticus. Phenobarbital (in tonic-clonic & partial) & clonazepam (in absence & 
myoclonic and other types) may be used as 2" line or adjuncts to other agents. 

e Pheytoin, carbamazepine & oxycarbazepine are contraindicated in Absence*® and 
Myoclonic seizures (may worsen them) 

* Adjunctive treatment (if first line treatment is not effective or not tolerated): carbamazepine, 
clobazam, gabapentin, lamotngine, levetiracetam, oxcarbazepine, valproate, topiramate 

% Adjunctive treatment; clobazam, lamotrigine, levetiracetam, valproate, topiramate 
*' Adjunctive treatment :combination of ethosuximide, lamotrigine or valproate. 
*Adjunctive treatment :levetiracetam, valproate, topiramate 
4 Levetiracetam is not used treatment of absence epilepsy (Not effective) 
Phenobarbital not preferred in absence epilepsy and Lamotrigine not preferred in Myoclonus (may worsen) 
e Fosphenytoin is a Prodrug phenytoin used in status epilepticus (Advantages: given IM or IV, better 

bioavailability and less phlebitis & cardiac side effects). 
e Oxcarbazepine is analog of carbamazepine with same indications but less potency and less side effects 

(enzyme induction and blood dyscrasias) 

e Gabapentine & pregabaline (to lesser extent, lamotrigine) may worsen Myoclonic. 

368 

Ty 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

Table 6.3: Adverse Effects & Precautions of Major (classic) Anti-epileptics 

Phenytoin Carbamazepine Valproate 

Hypersensitivity Skin rash =» stop drug 

GIT Disturbances | Nausea - vomiting - epigastric pain {most common with valproic 
acid) => give small dose after meals. 

Neurological e Nystagmus, diplopia. | e Diplopia. e Fine hand 
Disturbances e Ataxia. e Ataxia. tremors. 
(specially in toxic | e Drowsiness. e Drowsiness. e Ataxia. 
doses) e J Learning in e Less sedative. 

children. 

Effects on Enzyme inducer Enzyme inducer Enzyme inhibitor 
Hepatic ¢ 1 Metabolism of ¢ 1 Metabolism | e { Metabolism of 
Microsomal other antiepileptics. of antiepileptics & 
Enzymes e Osteomalacia : antiepileptics, other drugs. 
(monotherapy is 1 vitD metabolism warfarin & 
preferred) (= vit D & Ca% other drugs. 

supplements ). 

Hematological e Megaloblastic e Leukopenia ¢ Thrombocytopeni 
Effects (regular anemia ‘supplement | e Agranulo- a 
blood picture) folic acid’ cytosis 

e Lymphadenopathy 

Teratogenicity =» | e Cleft palate & lip - eo less e Spina bifida. 
give folic acid heart anomalies. teratogenic. e Neural tube 

defect. 

Others 1. Cosmetic changes e¢ Water eo Hepatotoxicity 
e Gingival intoxication & (rare but fatal). 
hyperplasia (gum | dilutional e Hair loss. 
hygiene). hyponatremia |e Polycystic ovaries 

e Coarse facial (potentiates e 1 Appetite. 
features. ADH). e 1 Body weight. 

e Hirsutism - acne. 
2. Unpredictable 

serum level-> 
monitor serum level. 

N.B,: Ethosuximide (safest): GIT upset, skin rash, dizziness, drowsiness, headache. 

369 



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 

sleep & epilepsy 
e—r ——— 

Specific adverse effects of newer antiepileptics*® 
They are better tolerated with fewer drug interactions than the older agents. 
e Topiramate: renal stones- myopia (glaucoma )- weight loss- hypohydrosis®, 
e Levetiracetam: mood & behavioral changes. 
¢ Gabapentin /Pregabalin: sedation, ataxia, weight gain- peripheral edema. 
e Lamotrigine: rash > fatal dermatitis {stevens johnson syndrome), hypersensitivity. 
Lamotrigine Drug interaction: 
1. Vaproate inhibits its metabolism (need to J its dose to 50%) 
2. Oral contraceptive pills and carbamazepine increase its metabolism (need to 4 its 

dose to control seizures) 

General guidelines for antiepileptic drug therapy 
1. Proper diagnosis of type of epilepsy & prescribing the appropriate drug (wrong choice 
may worsen the condition). 

2. Monotherapy is preferred since anti-epileptics are either enzyme inducers (phenytoin, 
carbamazepine & phenobarbital) or enzyme inhibitors (valproate). Combinations could 
result in changes in serum level of drugs. 

3. Start therapy with a small dose & a single drug and gradually 1 dose. If no effect is noted, 
gradually substitute or add another drug. 

4. Long duration of treatment: if epileptic fits are absent for 2 years, consider terminating 
therapy; but if fits recur, repeat treatment for another 2 years. 

5. Gradual drug withdrawal: over 6 months to avoid status epilepticus or relapse. 
6. Folic acid supplements: in childbearing period to |, teratogenic risk. 
7. Pregnancy & childbearing period: Be aware of potential effect of valproate in pregnancy. 

Pregnant females should receive the lowest effective dose of the drug (do not stop drug 
as seizures may be harmful to fetus). Pregnancy T metabolism of anti-epileptics =» adjust 
dose. Enzyme inducer anti-epileptics may reduce efficacy of contraceptives. 

8. Periodic monitoring of serum level of drugs, since a drop below therapeutic level loss 
of seizure control while an increase in level =>toxicity (CNS depression =» stupor - coma - 
respiratory depression). 

9. Sedation & tolerance limit the use of phenobarbital & clonazepam. 

% Zonisamide: rash -renal stones- weight loss- hypohydrosis; -Oxcarbazepine: hyponatremia, rash 
Levetiracetam, Gabapentin & Pregabalin are renally excreted & need dose adjustment in renal patient. 
Vigabatrin —nystagmus, blurred vision, vision impairment up to Vision loss and induces CYP2C9 
Phenytoin and Valproate are highly bound to plasma proteins (Aspirin, NSAIDs, Omeprazole may displace 
them from plasma protein —1ffree drug level — may {risk of their toxicity). 
Topiramate and Felbamate: induce CYP3A4 and inhibit CYP2CI19 
 hypohidrosis (sweat & may— hyperthermia; but rare & reversible) 
- Levetiracetam, Carbamazepine, Lamotrigine& gabapentin are prefered in elderly 
. Pharmacokinetic changes in the elderly that may affect and need dose adjustment: 

1. | clearance e.g. Carbamazepine 
ii. Lprotein binding if hypoalbuminemic e.g. Phenytoin, Valproic acid. 

The use of phenytoin is limited due to its troublesome kinetics resulting in unpredictable serum level due to: 
a. Irregular bioavailability (-»use one formula from a single manufacturer). 
b. Saturation kinetics (serum conc. may? to toxic levels = monitor serum level). 
c. Drug interactions if combined with other antiepileptics. 

370



CHAPTER VI: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

Management of Status Epilepticus®’:(drugs are given fV) 
1. Lorazepam®, midazolam (IM or IV) or diazepam (IV or rectal) for rapid control. 

Fosphenytoin (IM or IV) or phenytoin {IV) = long acting, to maintain control. 
Phenobarbital ©>2" choice to phenytoin. 
IV antiepileptics (Valproate, Levetiracetam) 
IV anesthesia =» in resistant cases. 

Therapeutic Uses of antiepileptic drugs: 
1. Epilepsy: {see below). 
2. Mood stabilizers in bipolar depression: 

e Lamotrigine — valproate — carbamazepine. 
3. Neuropathic pain {trigeminal neuralgia, post herpetic & diabetic neuralgia): 

e¢ Carbamazepine- gabapentin - pregabalin. 
4. Antiarrhythmic: 

e Phenytoin. 
5. Migraine: 

e Valproate - topiramate. 

Migraine and Antimigraine Drugs] 

e An attack of migraine starts by a prodroma (irritability, fatigue, muscle aches), followed 
by an aura {visual disturbances; scotoma) and in 30 minutes by throbbing headache; 
starting unilaterally with nausea, vomiting & photophobia. 

e Migraine is triggered by stress, hormonal changes (menstruation), disturbed sleep 
pattern, weather changes & alcohol. 

Pathophysiology of migraine (not fully understood) 
e Migraine may be due to release of pro-inflammatory vasodilatory neuropeptides (e.g., 

CGRP) from nerve endings of trigeminal nerve into the perivascular space = dilation of 
dural vessels = stretch of pain nerve endings. 

Drugs used to terminate acute migraine attack 

I. Mild analgesics: NSAIDs & acetaminophen (for mild infrequent attacks). 
Il. Triptans: "specific" antimigraine therapy: therapy for outpatients with moderate to 

severe migraine is begun with a triptan. 
Mechanism of action (selective SHT1s/10 agonists) 
1. Activate SHT1g/10 receptors on presynaptic trigeminal nerve endings to inhibit release 

of vasodilatory neuropeptides. 
2. Vasoconstriction of dural vessels —» prevent stretching of pain nerve endings. 

7" Prolonged or repeated tonic-clonic seizures: Active part of a tonic-clonic seizure > 5 minutes or Repeated 
seizures within < 30 minutes and A second seizure without recovering consciousness from the first one. 

8 Preferred to diazepam as its antiepileptic effect is longer & it is non irritant to veins. 

371 

ol ol 



CHAPTER Vi: DIENCEPHALON, RETICULAR FORMATION, 
sleep & epilepsy 

Preparations of triptans 
Sumatriptan: prototype *° (oral, SC, nasal spray) 
Adverse effects: 

1. Injection site reaction (with SC) or unpleasant taste (with intranasal). 
2. Chest pressure (resolves spontaneously in 30 minutes). 
3. Paresthesias, warmth, drowsiness, dizziness, weakness, malaise. 

Contraindications & Precautions 
1. Uncontrolled hypertension, ischemic stroke & IHD = 1% dose given cautiously in 

diabetics, hypertensives, men over 40 & in postmenopausals. 
2. Pregnancy. 
3. With serotoninergic drugs: SSRIs or within 24 hrs of ergots = SHT syndrome. 

lll.Ergots: SHT 1s/1p agonists similar to triptans 
1. Ergotamine tartrate (sublingual, oral, rectal); of choice in prolonged or 

frequent headaches. 
2. Dihydroergotamine (IV, IM, SC & intranasal). 

Adverse effects & contraindications of ergots: 
e GIT: Nausea, vomiting, diarrhea. 

Chest pressure. 
e Vasospasm-> gangrene (Cl peripheral vascular disease). 
e Cl. Pregnancy. 
e Should not be used for long term (= valvular heart disease). 

IV.Antiemetics 
e Parenteral metoclopramide (monotherapy in emergency; if ineffective add IV 

dihydroergotamine). 
e Oral metoclopramide = added to other antimigraine drugs (ergotamine) to increase 

their absorption by its prokinetic effect. 

V. Benzodiazepines & opioids in resistant cases (may lead to habituation & rebound 
headache). 

Drugs for migraine prophylaxis >° 
e Anti-migraine therapy should not exceed 10 days /month to avoid medication 

overuse headache “MOH”. Prophylactic drugs should then be administered: 
1. Beta blockers: propranolol and timolol: are of choice 

2. Calcium channel blockers: Flunarizine, Verapamil. 

3. Antidepressants: amitriptyline (TCA) 
4. Antiepileptics: valproate & topiramate. ({, Excess firing of trigeminal nerve). 

¥ Zolmitriptan (nasal & oral), naratriptan, rizatriptan, aimotriptan, eletriptan, frovatriptan (oral). 
*0 Other agents which may be used (but not FDA-approved) include SHT antagonists e.g. pizotifen, 

mirtazapine, ACE inhibitors, angiotensin receptor blockers & botulinum toxin. 

373 



Chapter VII CEREBRUM, MENINGES AND 

HIGHER BRAIN FUNCTION 

Chapter -VIi 

CEREBRUM, MENINGES AND HIGHER 

BRAIN FUNCTION 

373 



CHAPTER Vii: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 
functions 

CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM, MENINGES AND HIGHER BRAIN 

| Intended Learning Outcomes {ILOs}: 

By the end of this chapter the student should be able to: 

List the differences between motor and sensory cortex. 

Define types of white matter of cerebral hemisphere 

List major association bundles and commissures of the brain, parts 
of corpus callosum. 

Locate the internal capsule, identifying its different parts, fibers 
passing in.each part, blood supply & predict effect of lesion. 
Explain complementary specialization of hemispheres 
List the important cortical association areas and explain their 
function. 
Define speech and explain function of its centers. 
Describe mechanism of speech and mechanisms of speech 
disorders. 
Identify parts and connections of limbic system. 
Identify the role of limbic system in memory consolidations and 
emotional expression. 
Predict the effect of lesions involving three regions: the 
hippocampal formation, the amygdala and the septal areas. 
Outline function of limbic system and hypothalamus. 
Define memory and classify its types. 
Compare between declative and non declarative memory and 
between short term and long term memory. 
Discuss memory disorders. 

Define learning, 

enumerate and describe types of learning and their mechanisms 

Classify antidepressants according to their mechanism of action. 
Realize advantages and disadvantages of different antidepressants. 
Explain different therapeutic uses of antidepressants. 

Identify the therapeutic indications of lithium. 

Predict the serious adverse effects of lithium. 
Select the proper pharmacotherapy for treatment of each stage of 
bipolar disorder. 
Describe parts of lateral ventricle and drainage of each part 
Describe the choroid plexuses, telachoroidae, meningeal covering 
of the brain, subarachenoid cisterns and their contents 

Describe the function, formation, circulation and absorption of CSF 

Describe the arterial supply and venous drainage of the brain 

* Correlate between the distribution of cerebral arteries to various 
functional areas and the effect of their obstruction. 



= - - en —— 

CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 
functions 

CEREBRAL DOMINANCE AND CORTICAL ASSOCIATION AREA 

Cerebral Dominance [Complementary Specialization of Hemispheres) 

* There is functional asymmetry between the 2 halves of the brain. 

« Language functions depend on one cerebral hemisphere than on the 
other. This hemisphere has been called the dominant hemisphere. 
However, the other hemisphere is not less developed or non dominant. 
Each hemisphere is specialized for certain function. Consequently, the 
concept of cerebral dominance and a dominant and nondominant 
hemisphere has been replaced by the concept of complementary 

¢ specialization of the hemispheres or cerebral lateralization. 

« The hemisphere responsible for language and logical, analytic, 
sequential, and verbal tasks is called categorical hemisphere. The other 
hemisphere which is concerned with the visuospatial relations as 
recognition of faces, perception of body orientation in space, identification 
of objects by their forms, recognition of musical themes and artistic and 
musical talents, and emotions is called the representational hemisphere. 

The left hemisphere tends to process information in a fine-detail, 

fragmentary way, while the right hemisphere views the world in a big- 
picture, holistic way. 

Left cerebral hemisphere dominance tends to be associated with 

thinkers, whereas right hemispheric skills dominate in creators. 

« lesions in categorical hemisphere produce language disorders. Lesions 
in representational hemisphere produce agnosia (inability to recognize 
objects by a particular sensory modality) and contralateral neglect, they 
may impair the ability to tell a story or make a joke. They may also impair a 
subject's ability to get the point of a joke and, more broadly, to comprehend 
the meaning of differences in inflection and the “color” of speech. 

Hemispheric specialization is related to handedness. In 96% of right- 
handed individuals and 70 % of left-handed individuals, the feft hemisphere 
is the dominant or categorical hemisphere. 

Cortical association areas (figure 7.1) 

* They occupy most of human cerebral cortex. 

* They are involved in processing and integration of information received 
from many areas of the brain {motor and sensory areas as well as from 
subcortical structures). 

375 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

Supplemental, Pnmary motor 
and promo 

Secondary 
visual 

Parieto- 

Arsen Association 
ht) Area | areas 

Association Primary 
Area visual 

Prmary Secondary 
auddory auditory 

Figure (7.1)Cortical association area 

e The most important association areas are: 
1.The parieto-occipito-temporal association area 

2.The prefrontal association area 

3.The limbic (temporal) association area 

1. The parieto-occipito-temporal association area 
This association area lies in the large parietal and occipital lobes bounded by the 
somatosensory cortex anteriorly, the visual cortex posteriorly, and the auditory 
cortex laterally. 
Functions 
3 Analysis of the spatial coordinates of the body and its surrounding. 

Its lesion = Amorphosynthesis = failure of recognition of contralateral side of body 
leading to unilateral inattention and neglect = the patient ignores stimuli from 
opposite side of his body and the space around it and forgets its existence, dress 
half their bodies, shave half faces and read half page. 
J Area for language comprehension. The major area for language 
comprehension called Wernicke's area lies behind the primary auditory cortex 
in the posterior part of the superior gyrus of the temporal lobe. 
3. Area for interpretation of visual language (Reading): angular gyrus area 
lies posterior to Wernicke’s area is needed to make meaning out of the visually 
perceived words. In its absence, a person can still have excellent language 
comprehension through hearing but not through reading. 

4, Area for naming objects located between the anterior part of occipital 
lobe and posterior part of temporal lobe. 

2. The prefrontal association area 
It lies in frontal lobe anterior to premotor area. 
It is in charge of executive functions (=skills that one use to manage everyday tasks 
as making plans, thinking, solving problems and adapting to new situations). The 3 
main skills are working memory, cognitive flexibility and inhibition control. 

376 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

Functions 
1. Planning for voluntary activity 
2. Decision making 
3. Creativity. 

4 Personality traits 
5.Elaboration of thoughts 
6.0rganize events in time order 
7.Solving complex problems 
8.1t is the site of operation of working memory. 
9.Plans and motor patterns for expressing individual words are initiated and 

executed in it because it contains Broca’s Area. 
p 10.Due to its connection with the limbic system it shares in the control of emotional 

behavior. 
Lesion: 

. Lack of initiation and self control. 

. Inability to solve complex problems. 

. Inability to string together sequential tasks to reach complex goals. 

. Inability to learn to do several parallel tasks at the same time. 

. Difficulty in attention and easy distractibility and irregular linkless ideas. 

. Lack of temporal ordering of events 

. Loss of memory especially recent type. 

. Changes in personality and social behavior. Person becomes more implusive, 
aggressive. 

3. The limbic {temporal} association area 
This area is found in the anterior pole of the temporal lobe and in the ventral 
portion of the frontal lobe. 
Functions 

It is concerned primarily with behavior, emotions and motivation. 

SPEECH, LANGUAGE AND APHASIA 
Speech 

- {tis the means of communication between persons 
- [tis the ability to express words (spoken or written) in response to visual 
and auditory stimuli. 
- It is the highest cortical function. It is the function of the categorical 
hemisphere. 
- Speech has 2 aspects: 

. Sensory (language input), involving the ears and eyes 

. Motor {language output), involving vocalization and writing 
Aspects of Communication 
[. Sensory centers 

(|. Motor centers 

377 

0 NOY Ut BW KN = 



EA 
CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

Sensory Aspects of Communication 
For comprehension 

l. Visual association area 
Site: The occipital lobe. 
Function: Understanding of the meaning of written words. 

Il. Auditory association area 
Site: The temporal lobe. 

Function: Understanding of the meaning of spoken words. 
Ill. Wernicke’s area 

Sensory center of speech 
Site: Posterior part of the superior temporal gyrus in the categorical 
hemisphere. 
Function: 

1- Comprehension of the thoughts of visual and 
auditory information. 

2- Determination of thoughts to be expressed. 3- 
Choice of proper words to be used. 

Motor Aspects of Communication 
For expression 

I. Broca’s area = Word formation area 
Motor center of speech 
Site: Frontal lobe in the lower part of the premotor area (area 6). 
Function: 

- Formation of words (speaking ability) 
- Stores programs of the spoken words = sequence of coordinated 

contractions of lips, tongue and laryngeal muscles. 
It sends this pattern via a speech articulation area in the insula to the motor 
cortex (face and laryngeal regions) — corticobulbar tract — which initiates the 
appropriate movements of the lips, tongue, and larynx to produce spoken 
words. 

b. Exner's area = Hand skills area 
Site: It is present in frontal lobe in the upper part of premotor area (area 
6). Functions: 

- Stores program of the written words = sequence of coordinated 
contraction of the hand muscles. 

It sends this pattern to hand region in the motor cortex — corticospinal 

tract — written words. 
Mechanism of speech 

1. Spoken speech 
* Perception of spoken words occurs in primary auditory area which discharges 

to auditory association area where interpretation of individual words occurs. 

378 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

e In Wernicke’s area, comprehension of auditory information and 
determination of the thoughts and the words to be spoken occur. 

Transmission of signals from Wernicke’s area to Broca’s area occurs by way 

of the arcuate fasciculus. 

 |n Broca’s area: skilled motor programs for control of word formation are 
activated. 

* Transmission of signals to the motor cortex to stimulate the speech muscles 
resulting in act of articulation. 

2. Written speech (reading) 
» Perception of written words occurs in primary visual area which discharges 

to visual association area where interpretation of individual words occurs. 
* Then, the information passes to the angular gyrus which is located behind 

Wernicke’s area and appears to process information from words that are read 
in such a way that they can be converted into the auditory forms of the words 
in Wernicke’s area. 

* Finally reaches its full level of comprehension in Wernicke’s area. 
* From here, the sequence is the same as for spoken speech. 

Broca’'s ares 

Figure (7.2): Mechanisms of speech a) for spoken words b) for written words 

Speech disorders 
- Aphasia 
- Dysarthria 

Abnormality of speech caused by lesions affecting speech centers and not 
due to defects of vision or hearing or motor paralysis. 

379 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

They are caused by lesions in categorical hemisphere. 
The most common is embolism or thrombosis of a cerebral blood vessel. 
1. Sensory aphasia = receptive aphasia = fluent aphasia 
2. Motor aphasia = expressive aphasia = non fluent aphasia 
3. Global (general) aphasia 

a. Sensory aphasia 

i. Visual aphasia= word blindness 
Lesion: Visual association area. 
Patient can see the written words but cannot understand their meaning. 

ii.Auditory aphasia = word deafness 
Lesion: Auditory association area. 
Patients can hear the spoken words but cannot understand their meanings. 

iii. Wernicke’s aphasia 
Lesion: Wernicke’s area. 
Patient fails to comprehend the idea and thoughts conveyed by the spoken or 
written words {patient is unable to grasp the meaning of the words). Patient 
talks excessively but what they say make no sense. So, he cannot form thoughts 
or choose appropriate words to convey their thoughts. 

Conductive aphasia: 
A type of fluent aphasia in which patient can speak well and has good 

auditory comprehension but cannot put parts of words together or conjure up 
words and words cannot be repeated correctly. 
It was believed to be due to lesion in the arcuate fasciculus but now it appears 

to be due to lesions near the auditory cortex. 
Anomic aphasia: 

It is due to damage in the angular gyrus in the categorical hemisphere without 
affecting Wernicke’s or Broca’s areas. 
Patient finds difficulty in naming seen objects only. No difficulty in speech or 
understanding auditory information but patients is unable to understand 
written words and pictures because visual information is not processed and 
transmitted to Wernicke’s area. 

b. Motor aphasia 
i. Broca’s aphasia Lesion: Broca’s area. 
Patient understands the meaning of the spoken and written words but he 

cannot express himself by spoken words although he knows what he wants to 
say! (speech is slow, hard to come and limited to two or three words only). 

ii. Agraphia 
Lesion: Exner's area hand skills area. 

Patient understands the meaning of the spoken and written words but he 
cannot express himself by written words, although he knows what to write! 

380 

oo 



“TE — 

CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

c. Global (general) aphasia 
It occurs in extensive brain lesions involving both receptive and expressive 

functions. Speech is scant and nonfluent. 
2. Dysarthria 

It is abnormality of speech due to defect in act of articulation. 
Types and Causes: 

a. Spastic dysarthria due to UMNL giving slow labored stiff speech 
b. Flaccid dysarthria due to LMNL giving weak breathy nasal 
speech. 
ec. Ataxic dysarthria due to Neocerebellar lesion (lack of 
coordination) giving staccato speech. 
d. Hypokinetic dysarthria due to Parkinsonism giving slow 
monotonous low volume speech. 
e. Hyperkinetic dysarthria due to damage of basal ganglia causing 
quick involuntary movement (bursting speech) 

f Mixed dysarthria 

381 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

ANATOMY OF LIMBIC SYTEM 

A system concerned with emotions (e.g fear and anger), instinct(e.g., feeding, drinking, 
mating & mothering) and memory & has close connection with the olfactory system. It 
includes a group of curved structures seen on the medial aspect of the cerebral hemisphere 
around the thalamus; these include (Fig. 7.3): 
1. Cortical Structures: 

a. Limbic lobe Ant. nucleuosf aii 4 Te Limbic lobe 
b. Hippocampal formation thalamus S—<— Ji 

(hippocampus & other 
structures) 

¢. Septal areas 
d. Prefrontal cortex 

2. Subcortical Structures: 
a. Hypothalamus 

c. Amygdaloid nucleus. 
3. Connecting Pathways 

a. Fornix 
b. Cingulum 
c. Medial forebrain bundle Fig. 7.3 : limbic system 
d. Stria terminalis. 
e. Stria medullaris thalami 

Limbic Lobe 
C-shaped rim of cortex on the medial surface of cerebral hemisphere surrounding the 
diencephalon. It consists of: 

1. Subcallosal area (Paraolfactory Gyrus) 
2. Cingulate Gyrus. 
3. Isthmus. 
4. Parahippocampal Gyrus. 
5. Uncus. 

Papez circuit: Papez (1937) described a closed circuit involved in the expression of emotions 
and the consolidation of recent memory. it is formed as follows: 

1. The cingulate gyrus receives input from 3 association areas (sensory, visual & auditory). 
It is connected with the parahippocampal gyrus & uncus via the cingulum. 

2. The parahippocampal gyrus (Entorhinal cortex — Area 28) is connected with the 
hippocampus. 

. The hippocampus is connected to the mammillary bodies of hypothalamus via the fornix. 
4. The mammillary body is connected to the anterior nucleus of thalamus via the 

mammillo-thalamic tract. 
5. The anterior nucleus of thalamus is connected to the anterior part of the cingulate gyrus 

via the anterior thalamic radiation thus closing the circuit. 
Papez proposed that emotional expression is experienced in the cingulate gyrus, 
organized in the hippocampus and expressed via the mammillary bodies then through 
descending autonomic outflow, peripheral expression of emotion occurs. 

382 

Lad 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

The hippocampus is an elongated elevation of gray matter bulging in the floor of the inferior 
horn of the lateral ventricle. Its anterior end is expanded to form the pes hippocampus. It is 
named hippocampus because it resembles a sea horse in coronal section. The convex 
ventricular surface is covered with ependyma, beneath which lies a thin layer of white matter 
called the alveus which consists of efferent fibers arising from the hippocampus. The alveus 
converge to form a bundle called the fimbria which becomes continuous with the crus of the 
fornix. 

The fornix: (Fig. 7.4) is the white matter that connects the hippocampus to hypothalamus 
(mammillary bodies). It is formed of two posterior columns (crura) that begin from the fimbria 
of hippocampus. They arch around the thalamus, 
below the corpus callosum, where they come Boofd forynix 
close together in the midline to form the body of 
fornix. Behind the body is the commissure of 
fornix (hippocampal commissure) where fibers 
cross the midline from one side to the other. The 1 Commlssure 

body of fornix is connected to the under surface Ant. \ | of fornix 

of the corpus callosum by the septum pellucidum ~~ Column™Y\ 
then splits anteriorly into two anterior columns form} 
of the fornix, each dips in the lateral wall of the 
hypothalamus to end in a mammillary body. Mammillary os Aireialn 
Septal Areas: bod 3 $ ~~ : Lf Hippocampus 
o |tis formed of sparse grey matter that lies in 

the septum pellucidum and just infront of 
Fig. 7.4 : Fornix 

the lamina terminalis. 
e lt contains the center of pleasure. 
e It has the following connections: 

1. Medial Forebrain Bundle: connect the septal areas and amygdaloid nuclei with the 
hypothalamus. 

2. Stria medullaris Thalami (habenular stria): connect septal areas to the habenular 
nuclei. 

The Amygdala: 
e [sa group of nuclei that lie close to the tail of the caudate nucleus and anterior to the 

hippocampus, in relation to the tip of inferior horn of the lateral ventricle. 
e It was first regarded as a part of the basal ganglia but now it is considered part of the 

limbic system. 
e Stria Terminalis starts from the amygdaloid nuclei and curves around the thalamus, in the 

groove between it & the caudate nucleus accompanied by the thalamostriate vein. it ends 
on the septal areas, hypothalamic nuclei and columns of fornix. 

Applied: 
e Lesion of hippocampus or Papez circuit (in chronic alcoholism)=> anterograde amnesia 

(loss of recent memory& preservation of old memory). 
e Bilateral amygdalectomy in monkeys = Kluver-Bucy syndrome with docility, hyperphagia, 

increased sexuality. 

383 



CHAPTER Vil: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

PHYSIOLOGY OF LIMBIC SYSTEM 

Papez circuit: 

One of most important excitatory neuronal circuit involved in emotions, 
characterized by prolonged after-discharge due to presence of reverbrating 
circuits. 

This may explain the prolonged nature of emotions. 
It involves the following: 
Hippocamus = fornix = hypothalamus (mammillary bodies) = thalamus 
(anterior thalamic nuclei) = cingulate gyrus = hippocampus. 

Function of limbic system 

1-Olfaction 

Limbic system (Piriform cortex) is responsible for perception and discrimination of olfactory 
sensation. The piriform cortex, the amygdala and entorhinal cortex are regions of the 
olfactory cortex Conscious discrimination of odor depends on the neocortex {orbitofrontal 
and frontal cortices). Amygdala is involved with the emotional responses to olfactory stimuli 
Entorhinal cortex is concerned with olfactory memories. 
This function may explain close relation between smell, memories, emotions and sex. 

2- Control of feeding 

Limbic system is involved in the neuronal regulation of appetite. 
Lesions of amygdaloid nuclei © moderate hyperphagia (i.e. increase eating) and 
amniophagia (i.e. indiscriminative ingestion of all kinds of food). 
3- Control of autonomic response 
Limbic stimulation produces autonomic effects which are parts of the response to 
emotions. 

4- Maternal and sexual behavior 
Limbic system is important for normal maternal behavior and is concerned with 
emotional expression during the sexual act. 
Sexual behavior and function are controlled by limbic system and hypothalamus and 
modified by prefrontal cortex as well as social and psychic factors. 
5-Control of emotions 
Both limbic system and hypothalamus are concerned with genesis of emotions 
(feelings and moods) and their expression that include somatic motor, autonomic 
and endocrine responses. Emotions: feelings associated with autonomic and 
endocrine response as fear, rage and placidity. Stimulation of certain areas of the 
amygdala as well as stimulation of the lateral nucleus of hypothalamus produces 
rage and aggression. 
Stimulation of certain areas of the amygdala as well as stimulation of the 
periventricular nucleus of hypothalamus produces fear 
Stimulation of the ventromedial nucleus of hypothalamus produces placidity 

384 

ee ———— ——— —— Taa R r  ———— EE



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 
functions 

6-Relation to memory 
Hippocampus is the site of encoding of short term memory and its consolidation. 
Bilateral lesion of hippacampus leads to anterograde amnesia. 
7-Motivation 
it is the force that activates or inhibits certain behavior to achieve certain goal. 
Limbic system has two centers that control motivation: 

Reward (approach) system: 
Main center is present in the lateral and ventromedial nuclei of the 
hypothalamus. 
Less potent reward centers, which are perhaps secondary to the major ones in 
the hypothalamus, are found in the septum, the amygdala, certain areas of the 
thalamus and basal ganglia. Its stimulation leads to pleasure, satisfaction so 

y person continues to do the act. The main neurotransmitter is dopamine. Many 
substances that produce addiction increase the dopaminergic activity of that 
system. 
Other neurotransmitters include norepinephrine and serotonin. 
Punishment (avoidance= aversion) system: 

Main center is present in the periventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus and its 
extension downwards in periaquductal gray area. Less potent centers are in the 
amygdala and hippocampus. 

Its stimulation leads to displeasure, fear so stop doing the act. The main 
neurotransmitter is acetylcholine. 

Hypothalamus 
Hypothalamus 
The hypothalamus is situated at the base of the brain, in front of brain stem. It 
lies between the optic chiasma anteriorly and mammillary body posteriorly. It is 
divided into a variety of nuclei and nuclear areas. 

Hypothalamic nuclei: 
. * Anterior ->» Supraoptic, suprachiasmatic, preoptic, paraventicular 

nucleus. 
* Posterior —> posterior hypothalamic nuclei and mammiliary body. 

Medical = dorsomedial, ventromedial and arcuate nuclei. 

« Lateral — lateral nucleus and parts of tuber cinerium 
 Periventricular nucleus 

Perav antricuinr 
nucle 

An toeior 
Bor soumsechial 

CENT ITE SA EO 
Munietin 

Praag I 
nucieus | 
AN TTH — 
Ryphiimumic A nucious 
nucleus Le 
SP IROERIG ou? hy prothindanmis 
nucioun en wit 4 are 
Suprachiasmate — FATE @ YY 59 ol Vani omedial 
nucifaus Le Ed bin, nu igus 

Cotia Arcunin — Mean rniinry 
chisamn EE i nucleo body 

{=iafk of the nanny 
pet tory of 

Figure (7.5): Hypothalamic nuclei 

385 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 
functions 

Functions of hypothalamus 
The hypothalamus controls most of the vegetative (relating to involuntary bodily 
functions) and endocrine functions of the body, as well as many aspects of 
emotional behavior. It is concerned mainly with control of internal homeostasis. 
The major functions of the hypothalamus are: 
1- Control of endocrine glands: It occurs through: 

a- Nervous control 
The hypothalamus controls two endocrine glands 

- Posterior pituitary gland: where it controls secretion of oxytocin and antidiuretic 
hormones - Adrenal medulla: Posterior hypothalamus stimulates the secretion of 
catecolamines from adrenal medulla by sending signals through sympathetic nerve to 
adrenal medulla 
b- Hormonal control 
The hypothalamus controls anterior pituitary hormones through the 

release of hypophysiotropic (releasing and inhibiting) hormones. 
e Arcuate nucleus synthesizes dopamine, growth hormone-releasing 
hormone(GHRH) 
¢ Preoptic nucleus synthesizes gonadotropin-releasing hormone (GnRH) 
e Paraventricular nucleus synthesizes thyrotropin-releasing hormone (TRH), 
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH), somatostatin (SST) 
2- Control of autonomic nervous system 

a- Stimulation of posterolateral part produces sympathetic effects, 
(alarm response). 
b- -Stimulation of the anterior nuclei produces parasympathetic effects. 

3- Control of food intake and appetite: 
Hypothalamus contains 2 centers (called appestat) which act reciprocally: 

a- Feeding center: It is present in lateral hypothalamus. 
b- b- Satiety center:it is present in ventromedial nucleus of the 
hypothalamus. 

Feeding center is always active but it can be inhibited by satiety center, 
which contain glucoreceptors (glucostat). When blood glucose increases after 
meals this stimulate satiety center glucoreceptors, thus inhibiting feeding and 
producing satiety. 
N.B: Entrance of glucose to satiety center is insulin dependent this explains 
excessive hunger noticed in diabetic patients. 

« Lesion in Feeding center = Anorexia 

* Lesion in Satiety center - Hyperphagia 

4 Control of water balance and ECF volume: 
The hypothalamus controls water intake by stimulation of thirst center in 
lateral nuclei and water output by the release of ADH from posterior pituitary 
which controls urinary water loss. 
5- Control of body temperature 
Hypothalamus contains centers that regulate body temperature (thermostat), 
which maintains body temperature at the set point of the hypothalamic 
thermostat. 

386 



CHAPTER VI: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

a- Heat gain center in posterior hypothalamus causes cutaneous V.C. and 
shivering. 
b- Heat loss center in anterior hypothalamus causes cutaneous V.D. and 
sweating. 

ie Control of circadian rhythm 
Hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nucleus is considered as an internal biological 
clock responsible for periodic changes (diurnal rhythm) of many functional 
parameters in body (waking sleep cycle, body temperature, heart rate 
regulation, blood pressure, digestive activities, hormonal secretion) 
7- Control of motivation and learning 
Motivation is the feeling which activates certain behavior to achieve a certain 
goal. Both hypothalamus and limbic system control motivation through the 
rewarding and punishment centers. 
8- Control of emotional and sexual behavior, together with limbic 
system. 
Sexual drive can be stimulated from several areas of the hypothalamus especially 
the most anterior and most posterior parts. 

Lesion in anterior hypothalamus —= abolish sex interest 
9- Control of sleep 
Stimulation of the posterior hypothalamus produces arousal and awake state. 
Stimulation of the anterior hypothalamus induces sleep. 
Lateral hypothalamic neurons produces orexin hormone which appears to be 
important in switching between sleep and wakefulness. 

Memory, Learning & Amnesia 
A characteristic of human is the ability to alter behavior on the basis of past 
experiences. 

Memory 

It is the retention and storage of information for later recall. 
Learning 

It is acquisition of knowledge or skills as a consequence of experience, instruction 
or both. 

Classifications of memory: 
1.Physiologic classification 

From a physiologic point of view, according to the type of information stored, 
memory is divided into: 
a. Explicit or declarative memory 
b. Implicit or nondeclarative memory 

2. General (common) classification According to stage, memory is divided into: 
a.Short-term memory 

b. Long-term memory 

387 

er E———TT 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 
functions 

Physiologic classification 
1. Explicit or declarative memory 
Explicit memory is the memory for factual knowledge about people, places, and 
things. 
It involves conscious recall or awareness. 
It is dependent on the hippocampus and medial temporal lobes of the brain, 
neocotex and prefrontal cortex for its retention. 
It is divided into: 

-Semantic memory: general memories = facts (words, rules, and 
language) 
-Episodic memory: personal memories (events and experiences). 

Explicit memories that are initially required for activities such as riding a bicycle can 
become implicit once the task is thoroughly learned. 

2. Implicit or nondeclarative memory 
-Implicit memory is the memory for training reflexive motor or perceptual skills. 
-It does not involve awareness. 
-Its retention does not usually involve processing in the hippocampus. 

-It is subdivided into four types: 
-Priming: is the facilitation of the recognition of words or objects by prior exposure to 
them. 
It is dependent on the neocortex. 
-Procedural memory: includes skills and habits, which, once acquired, become 
unconscious and automatic. 

This type of memory is processed in the striatum and cerebellum. 

-Associative learning: includes classical and operant conditioning in which one learns about 
the relationship between one stimulus and another. 

This type of memory is dependent on the amygdala for its emotional responses and the 
cerebellum for the motor responses. 

-Nonassociative learning includes habituation and sensitization It is dependent on 
various reflex pathways. 

388 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

| Nondeciarative/implicit memory ] 

Procedural (siulls, | Priming and Associative leaming Nonassociative lsarning 
habits) perceptual {conditioning) (habituation, sensitization 

Figure {7.6): Physiologic classification of memory and brain regions involved 

General classification: 
Explicit memory and many forms of implicit memory involve 

1. Short-term memory, which lasts seconds to hours. 
2. Long-term memory, which stores memories for days, years and sometimes 
for life. 

Short-term [.ong-term 
memory memory 

Figure (7.8): General classification of memory 

Table 7.1 Comparison between Short-Term and Long-Term Memory 

Characteristic Short-Term Memory Long-Term Memory 

Time of Storage after Immediate Later; must be transferred from 
Acquisition of New short-term to longterm memory 

Information through consolidation; enhanced 
by practice or rehearsal 

Duration Lasts for seconds to hours Retained for days to years 

Capacity of Storage Limited Very large 

389 



CHAPTER VI: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 
functions 

Retrieval Time Rapid retrieval Slower retrieval, except for 
(remembering) thoroughly ingrained 

memories, which are 

rapidly retrieved 

Inability to Retrieve Permanently forgotten; Usually only transiently 
(forgetting) memory fades quickly unable to access; relatively 

(decay) unless stable memory trace 
consolidated into 
longterm memory 

Mechanism of Storage Involves transient Involves relatively permanent 
modifications in functions| functional or structural changes 
of preexisting synapses, between existing neurons, such 

such as altering amount off as formation of new synapses; 
neurotransmitter released] synthesis of new proteins plays a 
or temporarily increased key role. 
responsiveness of the 
postsynaptic cell to the 

neurotransmitter within The most important of the 
affected nerve pathways. physical structural changes that 

occur are the following: 
1. increase in vesicle release sites 

for secretion of transmitter 
substance 2. increase in number 

of transmitter vesicles 3. 
Increase in number of 
presynaptic terminals 

4. Changes in structures of the 
dendritic spines that permit 

transmission of stronger signals 

Site of storage Short-term memory is In various parts of the neocortex. 

stored in frontal lobe of 
cerebral cortex Short-term 

explicit memory is 
encodine thde 
hippocampus. 

390 



CHAPTER VI: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

N.B. 
The amygdala is closely associated with the hippocampus and is concerned with 
encoding and recalling emotionally charged memories. 
In normal humans, events associated with strong emotions are remembered better 
than events without an emotional charge, but in patients with bilateral lesions of 
the amygdala, this difference is absent. 

Working memory 
It is a form of short-term memory that keeps information available, usually for 
very short periods, while the individual plans action based on it. 
The prefrontal association area is the site of operation of working memory. 

Role of synaptic plasticity in memory and learning 

Synaptic transmission between neurons can be strengthened or weakened for 
short or long duration on the basis of past experience. 

‘ These changes in synaptic function are of great interest because they represent 
forms of learning and memory. 
They can be presynaptic or postsynaptic in location. 

Forms of plastic change 

e Posttetanic potentiation 

* Habituation 
Sensitization 

* Long-term potentiation {LTP) 
* Long-term depression (LTD) 

Posttetanic potentiation 

It is the production of enhanced postsynaptic neuron response following 
stimulation of presynaptic neuron by brief tetanizing train of stimuli. 
This enhancement lasts up to 60 s. 

Mechanism: 
- The tetanizing stimulation causes Ca®* to accumulate in the presynaptic neuron 

and increase neurotransmitter release. 
Value: 

It is the basis of short-term memory 

Habituation 

It is a simple form of learning and a classic example of nonassociative learning. 
It is a decreased responsiveness to repetitive presentations of a neutral 
stimulus. 
Mechanism: 
Gradual inactivation of Ca?* channels at presynaptic neuron by repeated 
stimulation causes decreased intracellular Ca?* and decreased release of 
neuratransmitter from the presynaptic terminal. 

Value: 
It is the basis of short-term or long-term memory._ 

391 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

Sensitization 

It is the opposite of habituation. 
Sensitization is the prolonged occurrence of augmented postsynaptic responses 
after a stimulus to which one has become habituated is paired once or several 
times with a noxious stimulus. 
Sensitization is due to presynaptic facilitation. 
Mechanism: 

1. The noxious stimulus causes serotonin release from facilitating interneuron 
that synapses on the presynaptic (sensory) terminal. 
2. Serotonin acts on serotonin receptors in the sensory terminal membrane, 
causing activation of adenyl cyclase inside the membrane that causes increased 
formation of cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP). 
3. The cyclic AMP results in blocking of the potassium channels in the 
presynaptic terminal resulting in decrease K* efflux. 
4. Lack of potassium conductance causes prolonged action potential in the 
synaptic terminal which causes prolonged opening of the calcium channels, 
allowing greater Ca%* influx which greatly increase transmitter release which 
produces a larger postsynaptic potential resulting in a more vigorous response. 

Value: 
It is the basis of short-term or long-term memory 

Long-term potentiation (LTP): 

LTP is a rapidly developing persistent enhancement of the postsynaptic potential 

response to presynaptic stimulation after a brief period of rapidly repeated 

stimulation of the presynaptic neuron, 

It resembles posttetanic potentiation but is much more prolonged and can last for 

days or even weeks—long enough for the short-term memory to be consolidated into 

more permanent longterm memory. 

LTP involves protein synthesis and growth of the presynaptic and postsynaptic 

neurons and their connections. 

LTP occurs in many parts of the nervous system and is especially prevalent in the 

hippocampus, a site critical for converting short-term memories into long-term 

memories. 

Mechanism: 
There are multiple mechanisms by which LTP can occur, some are dependent on 
changes in the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor and some are independent 
of the NMDA receptor. LTP is initiated by an increase in intracellular Ca%* in either 
the presynaptic or postsynaptic neuron. 
Value: 
It is the basis of long-term memory. 

392 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

Long-term depression (LTD) 

LTD is the opposite of LTP. it is characterized by a decrease in synaptic strength. 
Mechanism: 
It is produced by slower (prolonged periods of low frequency) stimulation of 
presynaptic neurons and is associated with a smaller rise in intracellular Ca?*within 
the postsynaptic neuron than that which occurs in LTP. 
Value: 
It may be involved in the mechanism by which learning occurs in the cerebellum. 

Consolidation of memory 
Definition: Conversion of short term memory into long term memory. 
It occurs when structural changes in the synapse are initiated. 
Duration: it requires minimally 5-10 minutes up to 1 hour or more for strong consolidation 
Factors affecting consolidation of memory 

I. Factors increasing consolidation: 
1- Attractive, interesting information. 
2-Quiet sleep. 
3-Mental rest. 

Il. Factors interrupting consolidation: 
1- Deep anesthesia. 

2- Brain concussion. 
3- Electroshock therapy. 

Memory disorders 

Amnesia 
Loss of memory either partially or totally. 
It may be: 
1. Anterograde: Inability to form new long-term memories as in 
atherosclerosis, old age and lesions of hippocampus or medial temporal lobe. 
2. Retrograde: Inability to recall memories from the past especially 
recent events that occurred shortly before onset of injury as in brain 
concussion, anesthesia and electroshock therapy. 
3. Global: Forgotness of both recent and remote events as in extensive 
brain lesions. 

Alzheimer’s disease: 
It is the most common an age-related neurodegenerative disease. 
it is slowly progressive and irreversible. 
It is the most common cause of senile dementia. 
It results in loss of synapses and neurons and neurotransmitters as 
acetylcholine. 
it is characterized by progressive loss of memory; first manifests as loss of 
episodic memory which impedes recollection of recent event. 
Loss of short-term memory is followed by general loss of cognitive and other 
brain functions, agitation, depression, the need for constant care and eventually 
death. 

393 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

Learning 

It is acquisition of knowledge or skills as a consequence of experience, instruction 
or both. 
It is two types: 

1-Simple {non associative) learning 
2-Associative (Conditioning) learning 

1-Simple (non associative) learning 
-It is concerned with modification of behavioral response to a repeated 
stimulus. - [tis two types: 
a. Habituation 
b. Sensitization 

2-Associative {Conditioning) learning 
-This involves establishment of correlation between one stimulus and the 
other or stimuli and responses. 
-It is two types: 
a. Classical conditioning: 

A conditioned reflex is a reflex response to neutral stimuli that normally do not 
produce response. A conditioned response is acquired by repeated pairing of 
stimulus that normally does not produce the response (conditioned stimulus) 
with another stimulus that naturally produces the response = (unconditioned 
stimulus), e.g. Pavlov's experiments Mechanism of conditioning (Similar to 
sensitization) 

b. Operant (Instrumental) conditioning: 
It is the use of consequences to modify the occurrence and form of behavior. 
It involves applying reinforcement (reward) or punishment after a behavior. 
The person or animal are taught to perform a specific task to obtain reward or 
avoid punishment e.g. response is learned by reinforcement or punishment 
(positive or negative), e.g. car driver slows down and stops the car on seeing red 
traffic light and drive on when seeing the green light. 

Reinforcement increase Punishment (decrease 
behavior})) behavior) 

Positive (something something added increases something added decreases 
added) behavior behavior 

Negative (something something removed something removed 
removed) increases behavior decreases behavior 

Mechanism: 
Stimulation of reward and punishment center 

394 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 
functions 

ANTIDEPRESSANTS 
Depression is a mood disorder. lt is classified into: 
1. Unipolar depression or Major depressive Disorder (17%): a genetically determined 
biochemical disorder manifested by inability to deal with normal stress of life. 
2. Bipolar manic depressive disorder (~ 2%) 

e Episodes of depression alternating with episodes of mania. 
eo Manic attacks are characterized by decrease need of sleep, flights of ideas, grandiosity, 

euphoria, talkativeness, lack of judgment, psychomotor agitation & may be associated 
with psychotic symptoms (hallucinations, delusions). 

Symptoms of Depression 
e Sadness — inability to experience pleasure (anhedonia) - fatigue- loss of libido - 

disturbance in appetite & sleep (usuallyd) - guilt — worthlessness - inability to 
concentrate or indecisiveness- psychomotor agitation or retardation- recurrent suicidal 
ideation.Psychotic symptoms (hallucinations & delusions) occur in severe depression. 

Monoamine Theory of Depression! 
e Brain monoamines, norepinephrine (NE) & serotonin (5-HT) are neurotransmitters 

responsible for mood. 4 Activity of these transmitters results in depression, whereas 1 
activity leads to mood elevation. So, antidepressants act via increasing monoamines. 

Table 7.3:Mechanisms of Increase of monomines by Antidepressants (AD) 

Amine Pump MAO Presynaptic 
Inhibitors Inhibitors o> Blockers 
Inhibit uptake | of biogenic amines {| Inhibit metabolism of biogenic | 1 NA & 5-HT 
into neurons resulting in their amines by MAO enzyme inside | release into 
accumulation in synaptic cleft, nerve endings => 1 stores synaptic cleft by 
potentiating their action at post | available for release. preventing oi 
synaptic receptors. auto-inhibition. 

Members Members Members 
1. TCAs: Imipramine - Amitriptyline | 1. Nonselective Mirtazapine 
2. SSRI: Fluoxetine Tranylcypromine. {Atypical AD) 
1. SNRI: Venlafaxine - Duloxetine. Phenelzine 
2. NDRI: Bupropion. (Atypical AD) | 2. Selective on MAQO-A 

Moclobemide. 
N.B.: Tricyclics; TCAs: Block NE & 5HT reuptake & autonomic receptors (Hi, M, a} blockade. 

1 Other theories : 1. 4 Brain derived neurotrophic factor essenfort siurvaivlal & function of neurons. 2. 
Abnormalities in hvpaothalamic pituitary adrenal axis & T cortisol level, 3. Glutaminergic theory, 4. 
GABAergic theory, 3. Inflammatory theory... ... .. .... 
Mechanism of Action of Antidepressants 

1. Increase in brain biogenic amines (immediately within 12 hours). 

2. Downregulation of brain 3 & 5-HT; receptors (delayed for 2-4 weeks). 

3. Affect neurotrophic factors essential for survival & function of neurons. 

395 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 
functions 

e SSRIs: Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitors. 
¢ SNRIs: Serotonin Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors. 

NORADRENERGIC SEROTONERGIC 

PLSTETRAFTIC RILEY - 

eo NDRI: DA, NA reuptake Inhibitors. 
Fig. 7.9: Mechanisms®? of action of antidepressant drugs 

i. Tricyclic Antidepressants (TCAs): 
(Imipramine, Amitriptyline, Clomipramine, Nortriptyline , Desipramine) 

Mech: 
1.Block reuptake of both 5-HT and NE. 
2.Block autonomic Receptors : Hi, M & a, 

= Adverse Effects of TCAs: {Limit their use) 
A.A utonomic Blockade (used cautiously in elderly) 

1. H; Blockade: 
- Sedation, hypnosis (specially Amitriptyline). 

2. M Blockade = Atropine-like actions: 
- Confusion — dry mouth- 1 HR....... 

3. a Blockade: - Postural hypotension. - Reflex Tachycardia. 

B.1 Body weight. 
C. (Used cautiously in cardiac & epileptic patients): 

1. Cardiotoxic (1QT) - Conduction defects - Arrhythmias. 
2. Convulsions: In susceptible patients 

S.(Used cautiously in suicidal or bipolar patients) 
1. Safety margin is low. 
2. Switch to mania. 
3. Sexual dysfunction. 
4. . Serious drug interactions>3: Avoid to be given with MAOIs (to avoid 5HT- syndrome) 
N.B. TCAs are reserved for resistant cases due to toxicity & drug interactions. 

*2 Other mechanisms for other new drugs: Ketamine a potent, high-affinity, noncompetitive NMDA receptor 
antagonist showed rapid antidepressant effect within hours (FDA approved nasal Esketamine at 2019). And 
Brexanolone (IV infusion) & Zuranolone (oral) are neurosteroid enhancing GABA4  receptor function recently 
FDA approved 2019 & 2022 for postpartum depression. 
33 Other Drug interactions with TCA: 

396 



CHAPTER VI: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

Il. Selective Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor (SSRI) 
(Fluoxetine, Paroxetine, Citalopram, Escitalopram, Sertraline) 

The most widely used initial therapy (15 line for treatment of depression). 
No Autonomic side effects. Less cardiotoxicity (But Citalopra4m Q-T>) - safer in overdose. 
Adverse Effects 
1. Nausea- Anxiety — insomnia- Drowsiness. 
2. Sexual dysfunction- 
3. Suicidal tendency?? (In children and teenagers) 
4. Serotonin syndrome with MAOIs. 
5. Drug interactions: Fluoxetine>* and paroxetine are potent inhibitors for CYP 2D6 = 1 

level TCAs, antipsychotic drugs, some antiarrhythmic and B-blockers = risk of toxicity. 

lil. Serotonin Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitors {SNRIs) 
(Venlafaxine ~ Duloxetine) 

No Autonomic side effects. 
Adverse Effects: 

1. Nausea, 
2. Sexual dysfunction, 
3. Headache, Insomnia. 
4. Hypertension, THR (with high dose Venlafaxine) 

IV. Atypical Antidepressants: 
(Bupropion, Mirtazapine) 

Bupropion 
Same advantages over TCAs as SSRIs. 
Does not d sexual function => used in depressed patients intolerant to SSRIs. 
? NE/DA (4 craving) => used in smoking cessation. 
T Risk of convulsions (Cl: in patients with history of seizures or alcohol withdrawal). 
Mirtazapine 
More rapid effect with less nausea & sexual dysfunction=> useful in patients intolerant to 

sexual dysfunction of SSRIs. 
Hi antagonist = sedation & weight gain. 
Antiemetic effect (inhibits 5-HT3 in CTZ). 
Management of TCA, SSRI, SNRI-induced sexual dysfunction: 
(delayed ejaculation in  & { sexual desire) 

1. Reduce the dose of the drug if possible, drug Holiday. 
2. In erectile dysfunction sildenafil (Viagra) may improve sexual function. 
3. Replace it with atypical AD e.g. (Mirtazapine, Bupropion) 

e Alcohol- anesthetics = sedation. Hypotensive drugs (1 postural hypotensive effects of TCAs). 
e TCAs potentiate directly acting symapthomimetics (| uptake of biogenic amines). 

TCAs Toxicity: Atropine toxicity- Convulsions . Conduction block & arrhythmia- hypotension.Management: 

NaHCOs for hypotension & arrhythmia. 

> Paroxetine is sedating useful in pts with difficulty in sleeping while Fluoxetine is activating useful 
in pts with fatigue or excessive somnolence. 

397 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

V. Monoamine Oxidase Inhibitors (MAOIs) 
e MAOIs were among the earliest antidepressants introduced for therapy of depression but 

due to their toxicity & serious food & drug interactions, their use is limited & several 
precautions have to be taken during their administration. 

Table 7.2: Serious Food (cheese)*> & DrugI nteractions of MAOIs 

MAOIs Plus 

Tyramine -rich -Cold Remedies - TCAs -TCAs, SSRIs =>1 S5HT 
food (sympathomimetics | (=> 1 CAT) -Tramadol - Pethidine 

I ) I : > tnorpethidine®® > 1 SHT 

Hypertensive crisis [Hypertensive - Hypertension | “Serotonin syndrome”: 
(Cheese reaction) |Crisis. - Tachycardia |-Tachycardia, Hyperthermia 

(CVS 1D) - Agitation, Confusion 
- Rigidity, Convulsions 

Precautions with MAOIs 
1. Patients on nonselective MAOIs should be warned against serious drug interactions & 

should be given a list of the foods they should avoid. 
2. Patients on MAOIs should not receive TCAs or SSRIs except after 2 weeks from 

stopping MAOIs (effect persists for 2 weeks, washout period). 
3. Avoid in the elderly = postural hypotension - atropine-like actions. (Autonomic) 

Moclobemide®’ 
e Short-acting, reversible inhibitor of MAO-A (RIMA). 
e Has the advantage of a reduced risk of cheese reaction due to: 
-Selective MAO-A inhibitor = allows MAO-B to metabolize tyramine. 
-Short-reversible MAQO-A inhibitor => easily displaced by tyramine allowing tyramine to 
be metabolized by MAO- A. 

55 Cheese Reaction: Tyramine in food is metabolized in GIT by MAO-A & MAO-B. MAOIs allow tyramine in 
tyramine-rich food (old cheese, chicken liver, chocolate) to escape metabolism & release T 1 T amounts of 
catecholamines from neurons =» hypertensive crisis. 

> Inhibition of pethidine metabolism by MAOIs =>formation of neuro toxic metabolite, norpethidine. 

Other Antidepressants :Agomelatine 

Melatonin M1 and M2 receptor agonist and exhibits 5-HT2C antagonism {‘T* DA &NA). 

Agomelatine is not hypnotic like Ramelteon because it increases release of NE via SHT2C antagonism=-1> 

Arousal. It is used in major depressive disorder in non-responders and intolerants to SSRIs. 

It corrects disturbances in sleep circadian rhythm associated with depression. Hepatotoxic 

°! Reversible Inhibitors of MAO-A (RIMA) 

Antidepressant activity of MAOIs is related to inhibition of MAO-A enzyme (responsible for NE & SHT 

metabolism). Thus to reduce risk of cheese reaction, selective inhibitors of MAO-A were developed. 

398



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

Therapeutic Uses of Antidepressants: 
A. Psychiatric Disorders 

1. Major depression disorder (main use) 
2. Anxiety disorders: generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) -panic disorder -phobias — 

obsessive compulsive disorders (QCD). 
3. Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD). 
4. Eating disorders : Anorexia Nervosa & Bulimia Nervosa ® 

B. Non-psychiatric Diseases: 
1. Pain disorders: e.g., chronic neuropathic pain (Amitriptyline & Duloxetine) 8. 

Stress Urinary incontinence>® (Duloxetine, due to central action). 
Nocturnal enuresis (Imipramine; anticholinergic = contracts urethral sphincter). 
Smoking cessation (Bupropion). 

. Insomnia: (Mirtazapine & Amitriptyline). 
6. Migraine prophylaxis: Amitriptyline. 

: Guidelines for the use of antidepressants 
e Antidepressant effect is delayed for 2 - 4 weeks; treatment is continued for 4 weeks 

before considered unsuccessful. If partial improvement, continue for another 4 weeks. 
¢ Following remission, continue treatment for 6 months. Long term maintenance therapy 

for 2 years may be needed if patient experiences recurrent episodes. 
e Gradual withdrawal over 4 weeks (to avoid Withdrawal syndrome). 
e [n cases resistant to initial therapy switch to a different member of same class or to 

another class. Then do combination therapy (e.g. SSRI + SNRI) 
e Atypical antipsychotic, lithium, or T3 may be added in resistant cases. 

“8 pain ( in the form of pins & needles or electrical shock), due to affection of sensory nerves( of pain, touch, 
heat & cold) e.g. trigeminal neuralgia, diabetic neuropathy or herpes zoster. Corticospinal monoaminergic 
pathway is important for pain transmission; thus antidepressants that f*m onoamines especially NE possess 
analgesic activity independent of effects on mood. 

59 Stress urinary incontinence (SU) is the involuntary, sudden loss of urine secondary to increased 
intraabdominal pressure that is bothersome or affecting the patient's quality of life. Physical activities 
precipitating SUI include laughing, sneezing, straining, coughing, or exercising. 

389 

nhw oN  



CHAPTER VIL: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 
functions 

CEREBRAL WHITE MATTER 
3 Types: Association, Projection & Commissural fibers 

Association Fibers (Fig. 7.10) 

Include fibers that connect different regions in the same hemisphere; which are either short 
or long: 

Short fibers connect adjacent gyri in the same lobe. commissural Association 
fibers fibers 

Long fibers: connect between lobes. 
Projection 

fibars 

1. Superior longitudinal bundle: connects 
the frontal lobe to the occipital lobe and 
the temporal lobe. 

2. Inferior longitudinal bundle: connects 
the occipital lobe to the temporal lobe. 

3. Fronto-occipital bundle: connects the 
frontal lobe to the occipital and temporal 
lobes. It runs at a deeper plane than 
superior longitudinal bundle, and is 
considered as part of it separated from it 
by the fibers of the corona radiata. 

Arcuate 
” ‘ fasciculus 

4. Arcuate Fasiculus: connects Wernicke’s a 

area (in the temporal lobe) to Broca’s 
area (in the frontal lobe); forming an arch 
around the lateral sulcus. 

5. Cingulum: runs deep to the limbic fobe & 
connects the cingulate gyrus to the 
parahippocampal gyrus. cress 

Fig. 7.10 : Association fibers 

400 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 
functions 

Projection Fibers 
Include fibers that connect the cerebral cortex with lower centers (diencephalon, brain stem, 
and spinal cord). It forms the corona radiata and internal capsule. \ts fibers are either 
ascending or descending. 

Internal capsule (Figs. 7.11 & 7.12) 

e A broad band of projection fibers running al 
between three masses of grey matter: Thalamus {1 : LV 
& caudate nucleus (medially) and lentiform 5d x og WN Ant. Limb 
_acleus (laterally). | 

e |t is V-shaped, having anterior limb, posterior 
limb, genu, retrolentiform part, and sublentiform 
part. 
A. Anterior limb 

eo Between head of caudate nucleus (medially) 
& lentiform nucleus (laterally). > / Retrolentiform 

e Contains: 
1. Frontopontine fibers: from frontal cortex Fig. 7.11 Internal capsule 

to pontine nuclei. 
2. Anterior Thalamic Radiation: connects 

Ant. thalamic radiation 
thalamic nuclei with frontal cortex. 

B. Genu _ Fronto-pontine fibers 

e At junction of anterior and posterior limbs. 
y " Corticonudear fibers 

eo Contains corticonuclear fibers (these are 
part of pyramidal tract fibers that end on jo mm Cortico-ubral bers 
motor nuclei of cranial nerves in the brain malamus —+ Superior thalamic 
stem). Cortico-spinal 7 ER /}) a 

C. Posterior limb lowerlink) i tary radiation 
e Between thalamus (medially) and Fig. 7.12: Internal capsule 

lentiform nucleus (laterally. . 
e (Contains: 

1. Frontopontine fibers. 
2. Corticospingl fibers (fibers for upper limb lie anterior while fibers for lower limb 

lie posterior). 
3. Corticorubral fibers (going to Red Nucleus of midbrain). 
4. Superior thalamic radiation (sensory radiation) from VPLN & VPMN of thalamus 

to sensory cortex (SI & Sli). 

D. Retrolentiform part 
e¢ Behind lentiform nucleus. 
e Contains optic radiation + parietopontine and occipitopontine fibers. 

E. Sublentiform parts 
eo Below lentiform Nucleus. 
e Contains auditory radiation +Temporopontine and parietopontine fibers. 

Blood supply of internal capsule: (see blood supply of brain) 

401



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

Commissural Fibers 

Include fibers that connect corresponding area in Rt. & Lt hemispheres across the midline. 
They include : 
1-Corpus callosum 2- Ant. Commissure 3- Post. commissure 
4- Habenular commissure  5-Hippocampal commissure 

I. Corpus Callosum (Fig. 7.& 17.145) rs NN 
oe The largest commissure. 
e Relations: { Splanium 

o Superiorly: falx cerebri & “tT ari 
anterior cerebral arteries Resim 7 conse 

o Inferiorly: for& nseiptxum Ant, — ~~ Pineal body 
pellucidum Sa 1 wn 

e Parts: rostrum, genu, body & NR, 
splenium. Ri ai) Zo" 
1. Rostrum: Connects the orbital Fig. 7.14 : Commissures of corpus callosum 

surfaces of the two frontal 
lobes. 

2. Genu: Connect the medial & lateral surfaces of the two frontal lobes. Its fibers 
form the forceps minor. 

3. Body (Trunk): Connects wide areas of cortex in parietal, temporal and occipital 
lobes. its fibers intersect with the corona radiata. 

4. Tapetum: fibers from posterior part of body & anterior part of splenium that form 
roof and lateral wall of post horn of lateral ventricle. 

5. Splenium: It is the expanded posterior part of corpus callosum. Its fibers curve 
back into occipital lobes forming forceps major. These fibers produce a bulb in 
the posterior horn of lateral ventricle. 

Il. Anterior commissure 

e |s embedded in the lamina terminalis, anterior to 

the column of fornix. | | 
e It splits into anterior bundle that connect anterior | pf + J Body 

perforated substances and olfactory tracts and a | 
posterior bundle that connect temporal gyri. 

Ill. Posterior commissure 
Forceps 

e [sembedded inthe lower lamina of the pineal stalk. 
major 

e It connects right & left pretectal nuclei, superior 
= 

colliculi& MLB. 
Fig. 7.15: Fibers of corpus callosum 

IV.Habenular commissure 

¢ |sembedded in the upper lamina of the pineal stalk. 
oe Connects the right & left habenular nuclei 

v. Hippocampal commissure or commissure of the fornix: 

e Connects the posterior columns (Crura) of fornix, thus connect right and left 

hippocampus. 

402 



CHAPTER Vil: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

LATERAL VENTRICLE, CEREBRAL MENINGES AND CSF CIRCULATION 
LATERAL VENTRICLE 
e [tis the largest brain ventricle. 
e The right and left lateral ventricles are the cavities of the cerebral hemispheres 

(telencephalon). 
e tis connected with the 3™ ventricle by the interventricular foramen (of Monro) which is 

bounded anteriorly by the anterior column of the fornix and posteriorly by the anterior 
end of the thalamus. 

e Each lateral ventricle is a roughly C-shaped, having a body, an anterior horn that projects 
into the frontal lobe, a posterior horn that projects into occipital lobe and an inferior horn 
that extends into temporal lobe (Fig. 7.16). 

Lat Body 
vantricle Ark. ROT _ 

Past. horn | Lat 
Dery ty ventricle 

interventricular = inf. horn 3 

foramen 

3Rventricle 4h ventricle 

Fig. 7.16 : Lateral ventricle 
I. The body 

e Extends from the interventricular foramen till the posterior end of the thalamus, 
where it becomes continuous with the posterior and the inferior horns. 

Il. The anterior horn 
e Extends forward into the frontal lobe. It is continuous posteriorly with the body of 
the ventricle at the interventricular foramen. 

il. The posterior horn 

e Extends posteriorly into the occipital lobe. Eras casi 

IV. The inferior horn AY 

L =) 
e Extends anteriorly into the temporal lobe. : | Charoid plaxu 

odie®  layer 
3 ventricle 

Tela choroidea: A two-layered fold of pia mater that lies 
above the roof of 3™ ventricle & carries blood vessels to the 3'9and ; T 
lateral ventricles. These vessels are: 
e Arteries: ant. Choroidal (of internal carotid) & post. Choroidal (of 

posterior cerebral) 
e Veins: a plexus = choroidal vein = internal cerebral vein 

N,B: Tela choroidea = pia + bl. Vessels. — chroid plexus = pia + bl.vessels. + ependyma 

Fig. 7.17 : Tela Choroidea 

403 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

CEREBRAL MENINGES 
Similar to the spinal cord, the brain is also protected by three meninges: dura, arachnoid and 
pia. (Figs. 7.18 & 7.19) 
Dura Mater: 

It is the outer layer & is tough and fibrous. 
It is formed of two layers around the brain, the outer endosteal layer which is adherent 
to the skull and the inner meningeal layer which forms 4 dural folds. 
The two layers lie close together but separate to include a venous sinus or where the inner 
layer forms a fold. 
The inner layer is continuous with the spinal dura “one layer only”. 

Arachnoid Mater: 
It is a delicate membrane that lies 
between dura and pia. 
It covers gyri & bridges over sulci of sdura) space 
the brain. Reanne a 
The space between dura & arachnoid ” 
is called the subdural space. It 2 
contains a thin film of fluid. 2A : 
The space between arachnoid and pia Fig. 7.18 : meninges 
is called subarachnoid space. The VHIIOUS BUTE SINUS 
later contains CSF and the arteries Arachnold granulation 
supplying the brain. 
The outer surface of the arachnoid 
forms at certain sites the arachnoid 

jit Cerebral vein 
villi and granulations through which 
CSF passes to the venous sinuses. 3 = ~ Subarachnoid 

The inner surface of the arachnoid is 7 space 
Pia 

connected to the pia by fine threads 
that transverse the subarachnoid space. Fig. 7.19 : arachnoid granulations 

Pia Mater: 

It is a delicate vascular membrane that is adherent to the surface of brain 
It covers gyri and dips into its sulci. 

@ The pia mater + blood vessels + ependyma form the choroid plexuses of the ventricles. 
The pia mater around the spinal cord forms the filum terminale at the level of lower 
border of 1% Lumbar vertebra where the spinal cord ends. On each side of the spinal cord, 
it forms the denticulate ligaments which pass through arachnoid to attach to dura. These 
denticulate ligaments help to suspend the cord within the vertebral canal. 

Subarachnoid cisterns: are wide parts of the subarachnoid space (Fig. 7.20). 
1. Cerebello medullary cistern = cisterna magna 

- Lies below the cerebellum & behind the closed medulla. 
- ltis continuous with the subarachnoid space around the spinal cord 
- It receives CSF from the fourth ventricles via three foramina: 1 median foramen of 

Magendi and 2 lateral foramina of Luschka. 

404 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

2. Cistern of great Cerebral vein (cisterna ambiens) 
- Lies above the cerebellum & below the splenium of corpus callosum. 
- It contains the great cerebral vein. 

3. Cisterna pontis: 
- Lies on the ventral surface of pons. 
- Contains basilar artery. 

4. Interpenduncular Cistern: 
- Lies ventral to the interpeduncular fossa. 
- Contains the circle of Willis. 

5. Cistern of lateral fossa: 
- Lies over the lateral sulcus. 
- Contains the middle cerebral artery. 

Cistern of lateral fossa cisterna 

ambiens 

Interpenduncular Cistern 

magna 

. Fig. 7.20. : subarachnoid cisterns 

405 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 
functions 

CEREBROSFPLUIIDN (ACSLF) 
It is a clear, colorless & odorless fluid secreted by the choroid plexuses of the different 
ventricles. 
The fluid circulates in the subarachnoid space and within the ventricles. 
The total volumei s about 130 to 150 mi. about 300 ml are Secreted avery 24 hrs. 
Function: a 
1. Protects brain against trauma & wide S|S a 

acts as a water jacket around it. -_ /, | Arachnold 
. granulation 

2. Helps to keep the volume of fluid plexus 
inside skull constant; any increase Sup. 

sagittal 
in blood volume (or brain volume) Monro sinus 

is compensated for by a decrease in 
CSF volume. 31 ventricle ee 

Cerebral aqueduct 
Therefore, maintains a constant a Ee a 
intracranial pressure. amide Xo Orfeo y J 

3. Removal of neuronal metabolites | Bee 
(no lymph in CNS) 

Formation: (Fig. 7.21) 
1. By choroid plexuses of ventricles 

(90% by lat. Ventricles) ' : 
2. A little amount is formed around 4 

cerebral vessels and from 1 
ependyma cells lining the Fig. 7.21 : Circulation of CSF 
ventricles. 

The choroid plexuses are formed by invagination of the vascular pia into the lumen of the 
ventricles, so vascular pia + ependyma (lining of ventricles) = choroid plexus. 

Circulation: 
Lateral ventricles = by interventricular foramen to = third ventricle = by aqueduct of Sylvius 
to =>fourth ventricle = through the median foramen (of Magendie) & the two lateral 
foramina (of Luschka) to >subarachnoid space. From here it flows in subarachnoid space 
around brain or around spinal cord. 

Absorption: 
Mostly through arachnoid villi and granulations into the dural venous sinuses especially the 
superior sagittal sinus. 

Hydrocephalus: 
An increase in the volume of CSF within the skull due to 4* formation or {, absorption or block 
in circulation of CSF. This excess fluid compresses the brain. 

406 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

B D SUPPLY OF BRAIN 

The brain is supplied by 2 arterial systems (Fig. 7.22): carotid (2 internal carotid arteries) and 
vertebrobasilar (2 vertebral arteries). Both 
anastomose at the circle of Willis. 

Internal Carotid Artery (ICA) 
e Begins at bifurcation of common carotid 

in neck (at upper border of thyroid 
cartilage). 

e Its course is divided into 4 parts: 
o The 1% part is the cervical part. —_ Post. 

| Communicating a. 
o The 2" part (petrous part) passes Post. Cerebellar a. 

through carotid canal of skull to . Basliar a. 

enter cranial cavity via foramen 
lacerum. _ Ant.Inf. Cerebaltaar. 

- Vertebra5l. 
o The 3™ part (cavernous part) runs in 

cavernous sinus giving branches to 
pituitary, trigeminal ganglion & 
meninges. 

o The 4™ part (cerebral part) 
emerges through roof of cavernous sinus medial to anterior clinoid process. 

e Terminates opposite anterior perforated substance by dividing into anterior and middle 
cerebral arteries (ACA & MCA). 

Branches of cerebral part of ICA (5): 
1. Ophthalmic 
2. Anterior cerebral 
3. Middle cerebral 
4. Posterior communicating 
5. Anterior choroidal 

Vertebral artery (Fig. 7.23) 
e Begins as branch of first part of subclavian artery. 
e Its course is divided into 4 parts: 

Oo 1% part before the foramen transversarium of C6. 
Oo The 2" part passes through the foramina 

transversaria of upper six cervical vertebrae. 
O The 3" part passes in the suboccipital triangle Basila 

artery 

then enters cranial cavity through foramen 
magnum. Vertebral 

The 4 part passes on ventral surface of medulla 
oblongata. 

Ends at lower border of pons by joining the other 
vertebral to form basilar artery. 

Fig. 7.23: Vertebrobasilar system

407 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 
functions 

¢ Branches of vertebral artery in cranial cavity: 
1. Meningeal 
2. Posterior inferior cerebellar 
3. Posterior spinal 
4. Anterior spinal. 
5. Medullary branches. 

Basilar artery: 
e Formed by union of right and left vertebral arteries at lower border of pons. 
e [t runs in a shallow groove along the ventral surface of pons. 
e At the upper border of pons, it ends by giving its two terminal branches “right and left 
posterior cerebral arteries”. 

Branches of Basilar Artery (5) 
1. Pontine branches 
2. Labyrinthine 
3. Anterior inferior cerebellar 
4. Superior cerebellar 
5. Posterior cerebral 

Circle of Willis “Circulus arteriosus” (Fig. 7.24) 
Definition: a large arterial anastomotic circle between the carotid and vertebrobasilar 
systems. It provides alternate channels if one vessel is occluded. 
Site: at the base of the brain, in the interpeduncular cistern. 
It is formed by: 
1. Right and left anterior cerebral arteries (ACA), with the anterior communicating artery 

joining them. 
2. Right and left internal carotid arteries (ICA). 
3. Right and left posterior cerebral arteries (PCA). 
4. Posterior communicating artery joining ICA + PCA. 

Central branches arise from the circulus arteriosus or very close to it to supply nearby 
structures. These central branches are divided into groups (sets): 
1. The antero-medial group from ACA. 
2. The antero-lateral group from MCA. 
3. The postero-medial group of PCA. 
4. The postero-lateral group of PCA, 

Ant. Communicating a. 

Anteromed.group 

Anterolat.group ST 

Posterolat.group - MCA 
=~; Post. Communicating a. 

Posteromed.group y PCA 

Fig. 7.24: Circle of Willis 

408 

Bi 

Jy, 



CHAPTER VII; CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

Anterior Cerebral Artery (ACA): (Fig. 7.25) 
- Origin: It is a terminal branch of internal carotid artery. 
- Course: It runs towards the longitudinal fissure where it communicates with the other 

anterior cerebral artery through the anterior communicating artery. it runs backwards 
over corpus callosum. It ends at parieto-occipital sulcus (P.0.S.) by anastomosing with the 
posterior cerebral artery. 

- Branches: 

Supply: Antero-medial set (AM 
e Medial surface (All except occipital lobe). | Pierce the anterior perforated substance to 
e Lateral surface (One-inch strip superiorly). | supply caudate, lentiform & parts of internal 
e inferior surface (medial part of orbital | capsule. 
surface). 

Applied anatomy: the ACA supplies the motor & sensory areas of the contralateral lower 
limb. Thrombosis of a congenitally unpaired ACA leads to cerebral paraplegia. 

Lateral surface Medial surface 

anteromed. 

group 
of ACA 

anterolat. 
ACA group 
MCA of MCA 
ICA 

—=H— PCA posteromed. 
group 

hy 2, of PCA 
Nh 
te posterolat. 
Zh group 

\ : ff of PCA 

Inferior surface .5 

Fig. 7.25: Distribution of cerebral arteries 

409 



CHAPTER VII: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 

functions 

Middle Cerebral Artery (MCA): (Fig. 7.25) 
- Origin: It is the larger terminal branch of internal carotid artery. 
- Course: it runs in the lateral sulcus & insula to reach the superolateral surface. 
- Branches: 

v Lateral surface (a large area except | Antero-lateral set (AL 
occipital lobe + a strip along superior | Pierce the anterior perforated substance to 
border + a strip along inf. border). supply caudate, lentiform & parts of internal 

= |nferior surface (lateral part of orbital | capsule 
surface + temporal pole). 

Applied anatomy: the MCA supplies the motor & sensory areas of the contralateral upper 
limb + speech & auditory areas + frontal eye field. Its thrombosis is very serious & if occurs 
on the dominant side aphasia occurs. 

Posterior Cerebral Artery (PCA): (Fig. 7.25) 
- Origin: The terminal branch of basilar artery. 
- Course: It receives the posterior communicating artery and turns around the cerebral 

peduncle to reach tentorial surface of brain. 
- Branches: 

o Medial surface (occipital lobe) | - Postero-medial set (PM): Pierce | To choroid 
e Lateral surface (occipital lobe+ | the post. perforated substance | plexuses of 

strip along lower border of to supply thalamus & lateral & third 
hemisphere). hypothalamus. ventricles 

e Inferior surface (tentorial part | - Postero-lateral set (PL): supply 
except temporal pole) thalamus & metathalamus 

Applied anatomy: the PCA supplies the visual areas of the contralateral 2 of both visual 
fields. Its occlusion leads to homonymous hemianopia but there is macular sparing because 
the branches supplying the macular region have strong anastomosis with the MCA (see 
special senses). 

Blood supply of internal capsule: (Fig. 7.13) 
« Upper 1/2 of ant. limb and upper 1/2 of post. limb are 

supplied by branches of middle cerebral artery. 
= Lower 1/2 of ant. Limb + the genu by branches of 

anterior cerebral artery. 
* Lower 1/2 of post. limb by branches of posterior 

communicating artery and anterior choroidal artery. 
= Retrolentiform and sublentiform parts by branches of Fig. 7.13 : Blood supply 

anterior choroidal artery. 

Applied anatomy: 
The internal capsule is frequently involved in cerebrovascular accidents. Because so many 
fibers are grouped in a small area, even a small hemorrhage can cause wide spread effects on 
the contralateral side of the body (total hemiplegia, hemianesthesia & UMN cranial nerve (Vl, 
Xil) affection 

410 



CHAPTER VIi: CEREBRUM.MENINGIES & higher brain 
functions 

VEOFI THEN BRASIN; 
Emerge from the brain to the subarachnoid Sup. Sagittal sinus 

space then pierce the arachnoid and 
meningeal layer of dura to drain into cranial 
venous sinuses. y 

Drainage occurs via 2 systems of veins: 

I- Superficial System of Veins: (Fig. 7.26) superficial middie 

= Superior cerebral veins =>drain into the 
superior sagittal sinus. 

" Middle cerebral veins 
- Superficial middle cerebral vein 

drains into the cavernous sinus. It is 
connected to the superior sagittal 
sinus by a superior anastomotic vein 
and to the transverse sinus by an 
inferior anastomotic vein. 

- Deep middle cerebral vein drains the Ant, cerebral wv, 

insula then joins the anterior Deep middle 
cerebral v. 

cerebral vein and the striate veins to 
form the basal vein which joins the 
great cerebral vein. 

= Inferior cerebral veins =» drain into the 
nearby sinuses (especially transverse). Great Cerebral 

vein 

lI- SDeeyp stoef vemin: (Fig. 7.27) 
48 | 

» Thalamostriate vein + I §4 

A Thalamo-striate v. 
choroidal vein =» internal 

Caudate ne. 
cerebral vein 

* The two (Rt. & Lt.) internal Choroid v. 

cerebral veins unite => great 
cerebral vein. Thalamus 

= Great cerebral vein + inf. i: om 
sagittal sinus => straight FH 
sinus. A 

| ! Great Cersbral vein 

Tentorlu 
cerebelli 

H 

! ~ Straight sinus 
do NE 

—RI yLo 00 El  aa 
i.a 

Fig. 7.27 : Deep veins 

411 



Chapter Vill INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE 

& NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Chapter -VIII 

INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE 

AND NERVOUS SYSTEM 

412 



Chapter -VIlI INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE 
& NERVOUS SYSTEM 

CHAPTER VIII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE AND 
NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs): 

By the end of this chapter the student should be able to: 
~

identify characteristics of common pathogens affecting muscle tone and nervous 
system. 
Describe mode of transmission, clinical presentations, laboratory diagnosis, 
prevention and treatment of tetanus and botulism 

e Describe life cycle of parasites causing CNS infections. 
e Identify mode of transmission of pathogens causing meningitis and encephalitis. 

Correlate the pathogenesis of the microbial infection to the clinical presentation 
and laboratory diagnosis of meningitis and encephalitis. 
Outline preventive measures for each infection. 
Describe pathological manifestations in each type of CNS infection. 
List treatment of choice in different infections. 
Classify antibiotics according to penetration of CNS. 
List antibiotics that can be used in prophylaxis and treatment of meningitis. 
Realize the role of dexamethasone in treatment of meningitis 
Explain precautions with selection of antibiotics in meningitis. 
Solve a case study problem about CNS infection. 

413 



Chapter -Viil INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE 

& NERVOUS SYSTEM 

Encephalitis Meningitis 

Herpes simplex viruses Bacterial: 

Varicella zoster virus Neisseria meningitides 

Rabies virus Haemophilus influenzae 
Arboviruses Streptococcus pneumoniae 

Cytomegalovirus Streptococcus agalactiae 

Epstein-Barr virus Listeria monocytogenes 

HIV Fungal: Lz 
Post-infectious encephalitis Cryptococcous neoformans 

viral 
Infections affecting muscle tone Coxsackieviruses 

Y Clostridium tetani Echoviruses 
Clostridium botulinum Poliovirus 

Herpes simplex viruses 
Other fungi causing CNS (mainly type 2) 

infections Varicella zoster virus 
Aspergillus species Mumps virus 
Mucor Rhizopus species | West Nile virus 

HIV 

Fig. 8.1: Common pathogens causing different CNS infections 

INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE 

Tetanus 

Clostridium tetani 
e Gram positive anaerobic, motile, non-capsulated spore forming bacilli. 
e Spores are terminal and bulging (drumstick appearance). 
e Clostridium tetani (C. tetani) presents naturally in intestine of animals and it reaches the 

soil from their excreta, so manured lands as gardens are heavily contaminated with its 
spores 

e C. tetani is non-invasive and its virulence depends on the production of a polypeptide 
exotoxin (tetanospasmin). 

e Vegetation of spores is favored by necrotic tissue and poor blood supply in the wound. 

Pathogenesis: 
Infection can occur through the following routes: 

e Spores of C. tetani are widespread in soil. 
e The portal of entry is usually a wound site e.g., when a nail penetrates the foot. 
e Vegetation of spores is favored by necrotic tissue and poor blood supply in the wound. 
e Another form is the neonatal tetanus where the organism enters through a 

contaminated umbilicus or circumcision wound (tetanus neonatorum/neonatal 
tetanus. 

414 



CHAPTER VIN: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

Toxin production: 
e After vegetation of spores at the wound site tetanospasmin is produced. 
e toxin reaches the anterior horn cells of the spinal cord by retrograde axonal transport 

(intra-axonal) to the central nervous system 

e [t binds to ganglioside receptors and blocks release of inhibitory mediators (e.g., 
glycine and y-aminobutyric acid [GABA]) at spinal synapses leading to sustained 
excitation causing the characteristic muscular spasms of tetanus. 

e Tetanus toxin has one antigenic type. 

Clinical features: 
e Strong muscle spasms (spastic paralysis, tetany), manifested by lockjaw (trismus) 
e Due to rigid contraction of the jaw muscles, a characteristic grimace known as risus 

sardonicus; and exaggerated reflexes. 
e Respiratory failure occurs as a consequence (high mortality rate). 

Laboratory Diagnosis: 
Tetanus diagnosis is strictly clinical. Lab diagnosis for confirmation for epidemiological 
purposes 
Specimen: wound exudate. 
e¢ Microscopic examination of Gram stained film: Gram positive drumstick bacilli 
e (Cultivation on anaerobic enrichment medium, Robertson cooked meat medium, followed 

by subculture on blood agar incubated anaerobically for 2-3 days at 37°C. 
e B-hemolytic colonies (due to production of tetanolysin) can be further identified by: 

o Gram stained film 
o Biochemical reactions: no sugar fermentation or gelatin liquefaction. 
o Toxin detection: 

= Subculture of isolated colonies on another blood agar plate containing tetanus 
antitoxin, after anaerobic incubation the hemolysis produced by C. tetani is 
inhibited by the antitoxin 

Treatment: 
General measures: Maintain an adequate airway and place patient in adark quiet area to 
avoid excitation. 
Antitoxin (Tetanus immune globulin): given at once to neutralize the unbound tetanus toxin 
Antibiotic: 
Metronidazole or Penicillin G to eliminate the organism. 
Prophylaxis: 
Tetanus toxoid is usually given to children in combination with diphtheria toxoid and the 
acellular pertussis vaccine (DTaP). Another form of the vaccine (Tdap) is given to adolescents 
and adults as a booster. 
When trauma occurs: 

a. The wound should be cleaned and debrided, and tetanus toxoid booster should be given. 
b. If the wound is grossly contaminated, tetanus immunoglobulin and toxoid booster as 

well, should be given and penicillin administered. 
c. The administration of both immune globulins and tetanus toxoid (at different sites in the 

body) is an example of passive=active immunity. 

415 



CHAPTER Vili: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

Botulism 
Clostridium botulinum 
¢ Anerobic Gram positive motile, non-capsulated, spore-forming bacilli. 
o It is essentially a saprophyte in soil that is frequently present in the intestinal tract of 

domestic animals. 
e Spores are oval and subterminal 

Mode of Transmission: 
e The spores are widespread in soil can contaminate vegetables and meats. When these 

foods are canned or vacuum-packed with inadequate sterilization, spores survive and 
germinate in the anaerobic environment. 

e Toxin is produced within the canned food and ingested preformed 
e¢ The highest-risk foods are alkaline vegetables such as green beans, peppers, and 

mushrooms and smoked fish. 
¢ The toxin is relatively heat-labile; inactivated by boiling for several minutes. Thus, disease 

can be prevented by sufficient cooking. 

Pathogenesis: 
e Botulinum toxin is absorbed from the gut and carried via the blood to peripheral nerve 

synapses, where it blocks release of acetylcholine. 
e [tis a protease that cleaves the proteins involved in acetylcholine release. 
e The toxin is a polypeptide encoded by a lysogenic phage. It is among the most toxic 

substances known. 
e There are eight immunologic types of toxin; types A, B, and E are the most common 

in human illness. 

Clinical Findings: 
¢ Descending weakness and paralysis, including diplopia, dysphagias, and respiratory 

muscle failure, are seen. | 

eo No fever. 
e Two special clinical forms occur: 

1. Wound botulism: in which spores contaminate a wound, germinate, and produce 
toxin at the site 

2. Infant botulism: in which the organisms grow in the gut and produce the toxin 
there. Ingestion of honey containing the organism is implicated in transmission of 
infant botulism. Affected infants develop weakness or paralysis and may need 
respiratory support. 

Laboratory Diagnosis: 
Initial diagnosis is based on clinical symptoms. Treatment should not wait for laboratory 
confirmation. Laboratory diagnosis is commonly required to supplement and confirms clinical 
diagnosis. 
Specimen: 
1- Tests for toxin detection in food remnants or patient blood 

a. PCR can identify the organism and the toxin gene. 
b. Animal pathogenicity and in vivo neutralization test (Food extract is injected in mice; 

the animal will die with flaccid paralysis. The antigenic type of the toxin is identified 

416



CHAPTER Vili: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

by neutralization with specific antitoxin in mice, i.e. the animal will not die if protected 
by a specific antitoxin. 

c. ELISA assays have been developed to detect the botulinum toxin, 

2- Isolation& identification: 
Specimen: Food remnants, gastric contents obtained by gastric lavage. 
e (Cultivation on Robertson cooked meat media and subculture on blood agar plate 

incubated anaerobically at 37°C, for 48h. 
e Hemolytic colonies on blood agar are further identified by: 

o Microscopic film: Gram stained film shows Gram positive spore forming bacilli 
o Biochemical reactions: C. botulinum ferments glucose and maltose. proteolytic 

strains (A, B and E) causes blackening of Robertson cooked meat medium, gelatin 
liquefaction and positive H2S production test. 

o Animal pathogenicity toxin detection by intraperitoneal injection of the 
supernatant from the culture extract into mice. The mouse dies rapidly with 
generalized flaccid paralysis. The type of toxin can be determined by neutralization 
with specific antitoxin in mice. 

Treatment: 
Trivalent antitoxin (types A, B, and E) and respiratory support. 

Prevention: 
e Proper canning techniques and adequate heating of home-canned food to inactivate any 

toxin present. 
e Swollen cans must be discarded (clostridial proteolytic enzymes form gas, which swells 

cans). 

Other organisms causing flaccid paralysis 
v' Poliovirus 
v' Enterovirus 68, 
v' Enterovirus 70, 
v' Coxsackieviruses A and B 

Portals of infection of the CNS: 
CNS is a sterile body site; Pathogens may access the CNS through: 

e Hematogenous spread by way of the arterial blood supply is the most common means 
of entry. There can also be retrograde venous spread, through the anastomoses between 
veins of the face and the venous sinuses of the skull. 
Direct implantation of microorganisms is almost invariably due to traumatic 
introduction of foreign material. In rare cases it can be iatrogenic, as when microbes are 
introduced with a lumbar puncture needle. 

o Local extension can occur with infections of the skull or spine. 
e Peripheral nerves also may serve as paths of entry for a few pathogens—in particular, 

viruses such as the rabies and herpes zoster viruses. 

417 



CHAPTER Vil: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

Meningitis 
Meningitis is an inflammatory process involving the meninges, it can be due to infection or 
non- infection causes. This part is concerned with infection causes. 
Depending on speed of the initial presentation and the rate of progression of the illness; 
Meningitis can be categorized as: 
- Acute meningitis: is caused by either pyogenic bacteria, such as Streptococcus 
pneumoniae and Neisseria meningitidis, or viruses, such as Coxsackie virus and herpes 
simplex virus type 2. 

- Subacute meningitis is caused by Mycobacterium tuberculosis and fungi, such as 
Cryptococcus. . 

- Chronic meningitis: complication of acute or subacute meningitis 

Pathophysiology of meningitis: 
e¢ Hematogenous spread (i.e., bacteremia) after invasion of the upper respiratory mucosa 

is the most common route by which organisms reach the meninges. 
e Following invasion of the meninges, meningeal irritation, inflammatory response and 

edema cause many of the clinical manifestations. 

Signs and symptoms: 
e Fever. 

e Headache, vomiting. 
e Photophobia. 

Loss of various brain functions leading to drowsiness and altered mental state. 
Neck stiffness. 
Signs and symptoms of meningitis may rapidly develop; for example, meningococcal 
meningitis can kill within six hours of the initial symptoms, allowing little time for 
treatment. 

e Petechiae (small, dark purplish hemorrhages of blood vessels in the skin) are sometimes 
present. 

Laboratory diagnosis: CSF examination 
e CSF is obtained by performing a lumber puncture at the L3-L4 intervertebral space. 
e A lumbar puncture reveals the normally clear CSF. 
¢ In meningitis, the CSF pressure is measured, and fluid obtained for analysis of cells 

(both number and cell type, i.e., neutrophils or lymphocytes), protein, and glucose 
(Table 8.1) and microbiological diagnosis. 

¢ Further microbiologic examination is performed according to the results of CSF analysis 
and this includes: 
Oo microscopic examination of Gram stained films prepared from the CSF deposit after 

centrifugation. 
o Ag detection by specific antisera from the CSF supernatant. 
o Culture on suitable media for isolation of microbial cause, identification and 

antimicrobial susceptibility. 
o PCR test particularly for suspected viral causes and non-culturable or difficult to 

culture microbes. 

418 



CHAPTER VII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

o Although CSF analysis is a very important step in the diagnosis of many CNS infections, a 
lumbar puncture should not be performed if there is (are): 
o Signs of increased intracranial tension, such as papilledema or focal neurologic signs, 

to avoid herniation of the brain stem that may lead to death. 
o A mass lesion on CT scan (brain abscess or tumor). 

Table 8.1: CSF examination of bacterial, viral, and fungal meningitis 
Etiology Protein Glucose Cell infiltration Pressure 
Bacterial 4 NN PMNLs di 
Viral Tor Normal Normal Lymphocytes Normal 
Fungal 1 J Lymphocytes i i 

Bacterial meningitis 
It is mostly caused by: 

1. Neisseria meningitides 
2. Haemophilus influenzae 
3. Streptococcus pneumoniae 
4. Other pyogenic bacteria as Staph. aureus, Pseudomonas aeruginosa cause meningitis 

when introduced by lumbar puncture or head trauma. 
5. M. tuberculosis: tuberculous meningitis. 

N.B.: Most common causes of neonatal meningitis are E. coli K1, Streptococcus agalactiae, 
and Listeria monocytogens. 

Neisseria meningitides 
e Meningococci are non- motile, Gram negative kidney-shaped capsulated diplococci 

(always appear in pairs). 
e [t is the most common cause of purulent meningitis called epidemic cerebrospinal 

meningitis. 
e Meningococci are divided into at least 13 capsular polysaccharide types(serotypes), of 

them five serotypes cause most cases of meningitis: A, B, C, Y, and W-135. 
e Serotype A is the leading cause of epidemic meningitis worldwide. 
Virulence factors: 
1. Polysaccharide Capsule: It is the most important virulence factor as it isanti-phagocytic 

and anti-complementary. It is also antigenic; against which protective antibodies are 
produced. 

2. Lipopolysaccharides: It is the endotoxin which can cause fulminant meningococcemia and 
septic shock. 

. Pili: mediate attachment to mucosa 
4. \gA proteases: helps the bacteria attach to the membranes of the upper respiratory tract 

by destroys secretory IgA. 
5. Factor H binding protein; Inhibits c3b complement component and helps the organism 

evade the immune response. (This protein is an immunogen used in development of 
vaccine against group B meningococci). 

Mode of transmission: 
e Respiratory droplets of cases or carriers 
e They colonize the mucous membranes of the nasopharynx and become part of the 

transient flora of the upper respiratory tract in 5-10% of normal population. 

419

Lad 



CHAPTER Vil: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

¢ The carriage rate can be as high as 35% in people who live in close quarters (e.g., military 
recruits). During epidemics the carrier rates may reach 20-90%. 

e (Carriers are usually asymptomatic. 

Pathogenesis and clinical presentations 
¢ From the nasopharynx, the organism can enter the bloodstream and spread to the 

subarachnoid space mainly through blood as a result of bacteremia (hematogenous 
spread) or in some instances meningococci reach CNS through the sheath of the olfactory 
nerve (direct spread). 

e The disease is characterized by fever, sore throat, severe headache, photophobia, 
projectile vomiting, nuchal rigidity, coma and death. 

e Fulminant meningococcemia (septicemia) with intravascular coagulation, circulatory 
collapse and potentially fatal shock may occur without meningitis 

¢ Asymptomatic carrier: About 5% of people become chronic convalescent carriers and 
serve as a source of infection for others. 

Laboratory Diagnosis: 
Diagnosis of a case: 
e Specimens: CSF, Blood for blood culture, and Nasopharyngeal swab 

1- CSF examination 
CSF is turbid and under tension, after centrifugation: 
Supernatant examination shows 
o Elevated Leucocytic cell count, mostly neutrophils, decreased glucose levels and 

increased protein levels as indicators of bacterial meningitis (Table 8.1). 
o Detection of capsular meningococcal antigen by latex agglutination or ring 

precipitation test. 
Deposit is used for bacteriological examination: 
a. Direct Gram stained film: typical morphology within pus cells. 
b. Culture on Thayer- Martin medium or chocolate blood agar medium (5-10% CQ»). 

Colonies are small transparent or grey colonies that are furtherly identified as 
e Gram negative diplococci. 
e¢ (Oxidase positive. 
e Glucose and maltose fermentation with production of acid only. 

c. A presumptive diagnosis of meningococcal meningitis can be made if gram 
negative diplococci are visualized microscopically in direct smears and oxidase- 
positive colonies of gram-negative diplococci are isolated. 

d. Confirmatory test: 
Latex agglutination test can assist in the rapid diagnosis of meningococcal 
meningitis, which detects capsular polysaccharide in the spinal fluid and used for 
Serogrouping. 

2- Blood culture: done as usual then subculture is done onto chocolate agar (further 
isolation and identification as CSF samples). 

3- PCR (if available) is sensitive and specific. 
Diagnosis of asymptomatic carrier: 
e A nasopharyngeal swab is inoculated onto enriched selective medium as Thayer-Martin 

medium and incubated for 24 hours at 37°C with 5% CO. If delay is unavoidable, swabs 
should be plunged into a transport medium until cultured. 

420



CHAPTER VII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

e Suspected colonies are identified as before and should be differentiated from commensal 
Neisseriae. 

e Unlike pathogenic Neisseria, the Commensal Neisseriae: 
1- Can grow on ordinary media. 
2- Do not require CO2 enriched atmosphere. 
3- Can grow at room temperature. 
4- Sugar utilization is variable. 
5- Cannot agglutinate with group-specific antiserum. 

Prevention 
Chemoprophylaxis (for contacts of cases during epidemics) 
e Rifampicin is preferred because it is efficiently secreted into saliva (alsoeradicates 

carriers); or 
e Ciprofloxacin: widely used as a prophylactic drug for adolescents as a single oral dose. 
Vaccination: 
Effective in preventing meningitis epidemics and in reducing carrier rates 
Against groups A, C, Y, W-135: 

oe Types: 
o The conjugate vaccines: contains the four polysaccharides (A, C, Y, W135), conjugated 

to a carrier protein (either tetanus toxoid or genetically modified diphtheria toxin). 
o The unconjugated vaccine that contains only the four polysaccharides (A, C, Y, W135) 

(Meningococcal polysaccharide vaccine; MPSV4). 
eo The conjugate vaccines induce higher titers of antibodies in children than does the 

unconjugated vaccine. The vaccines induce similar antibody titers in adults. 
e Conjugate vaccines are preferred because the combination with carrier proteins make 

them immunogenic even in the youngest infants. They also effectively generate 
immunological memory and reduce the nasopharyngeal carriage. 

Against group B: 
Contains factor H binding protein as an immunogen 

Streptococcus pneumoniae 
(Pneumococci) 
e¢ Pneumococci are catalase-negative Gram-positive cocci, non-motile non-spore, forming, 

typically lanceolate in shape. 
e Arranged in pairs and possess polysaccharide capsule that permits typing with specific 

antisera. 
Pathogenesis : 
Pneumococcal meningitis occurs mostly as a result of local spread from the mastoid to 
meninges (in case of otitis media) or hematogenous spread as a result of bacteremia 
associating lobar pneumonia. 

Virulence factors: 
1. Capsule: [tis the main virulence factor. lt is anti-phagocytic. Pneumococci can be classified 

into 90 serotypes according to the capsular polysaccharide. Capsule swelling test is used 
for typing of Pneumococci (Quellung reaction). 

2. IgA1 protease: cleaves human IgA the principal immunoglobulin in the upper respiratory 
tract. 

3. Pneumolysin: a membrane damaging toxin. 

421 



— = 

CHAPTER VII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

4. Autolysin: (t breaks the peptide cross-linking of peptidoglycan leading to lysis of 
pneumococci. This releases large amounts of cell wall fragments. The massive 
inflammatory response to these fragments is an important component of the 
pathogenesis of pneumonia and meningitis caused by Pneumococci. 

Laboratory Diagnosis 
Specimen: CSF, Blood for blood culture. 
1- Isolation and identification 

Strept pneumonia forms a-Hemolytic colonies on blood agar (needs enrichedmedia and 
aerobic incubation in 5-10% CO; at 37°C for 24 hours). 
e Colonies have "draughtsman" appearance. 
e Positive Quellung reaction (capsule swelling test): rapid slide precipitationtest. 

2- Latex agglutination test: rapid detection of capsular polysaccharide antigen in CSF. 

Prevention 
= 13-valent pneumococcal conjugate vaccine: capsular polysaccharides conjugated to a 

carrier protein (protects against 13 serotypes). 
Indications: 

- Children <5 years. 
- Immunocompromising conditions (congenial or acquired). 
- Anatomical or functional asplenia (e.g. sickle cell disease). 

= 23-valent pneumococcal vaccine: un-conjugated polyvalent capsular polysaccharide 
antigens (23 serotypes). 
Indications: 

- immunocompetent elderly (>65yrs) 
- Adults with chronic medical conditions (e.g. chronic heart and lung diseases). 

Haemophilus influenzae 
oe Pleomorphic Gram-negative coccobacilli. 

The most virulent strains of H. influenzae have a polysaccharide capsule (typeable strains) 
The capsulated strains are of six antigenic types (a-f). 
Type (b) is the most virulent 
Meningitis caused by Haemophilus influenzae mostly affects children from 6 months to 
6years and caused by type b (the most virulent strain) {Hib)transmitted from person to 
person through respiratory droplets. 

e |ts growth on laboratory media requires the addition of twocomponents, heme (factor X) 
and NAD (factor V). 

Virulence factors: 
eo Polysaccharide capsulewith a polyribosyiribitol phosphate (PRP) componont: 

antiphagocytic (the major virulence factor). 
e Lipopolysaccharide endotoxin : responsible for the inflammatory process. 
e |gA protease: destroys secretory IgA aiding the mucosal colonization. 
e Pilli: adhesion. 

422



CHAPTER Vill: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

Laboratory Diagnosis 
Specimen: CSF, Blood for blood culture. 

1- Gram-stained smear (plenty of pus cells and short Gram-negative pleomorphicbacilli). 
2- Culture on chocolate agar as it requires both factors X and V and 5-10% CO; for 1-2 

days. 
3- Satellitism: H. influenzae grows well around colonies of Staphylococcus aureus. 
4- Rapid Capsular antigen detection: in serum by latex agglutination, IF or ELISA. 
5- PCR. 

Prevention 
The Haemophilus influenzae type b (Hib) conjugate vaccine: 
e polyribosylribitol phosphate (PRP) polysaccharide from the Hib capsule conjugated to a 

protein carrier, prevents invasive Hib disease and reduces naso-pharyngeal carriage. 
e for infants between 2 and 15 months. 

Streptococcus agalactiae 

Classification: 
e [tis one of the group-B beta-hemolytic Streptococci (GBS) 
e (Catalase negative Gram-positive cocci 
Pathogenesis and clinical diseases: 
¢ [tis an intermittent commensal in the vagina of some females. 
e |f acquired by neonates from the birth canal during delivery, it can cause neonatal sepsis 

and neonatal meningitis. 
e The main predisposing factor is prolonged (longer than 18 hours) rupture of the 

membranes in women who are colonized with the organism. 
Virulence factors: A polysaccharide capsules 
Laboratory Diagnosis 
Specimen: vaginal and rectal swab 
Culture on blood agar medium, Streptococcus agalactiae is identified as: 
eo Beta hemolytic colonies on blood agar 
e Positive Hippurate hydrolysis test. 
e Positive CAMP test (Group B Streptococci produce a factor that increases § hemolysis of 

an S.aureus indicator strain) 
Prevention: To reduce the incidence of neonatal sepsis and meningitis: 

1. Screening for all pregnant women at 35 to 37 weeks’ gestation by doing vaginal and 
rectal cultures. If cultures are positive, then penicillin G (or ampicillin) should be 
administered intravenously at the time of delivery. 

2. Penicillin G (or ampicillin) administered intravenously at the time of delivery 
(intrapartum) without screening results in the following conditions: 

Prolonged (longer than 18 hours) rupture of membranes. 
Preterm labor (before 37 weeks of pregnancy). 
Fever at the time of labor (238°C). 
History of previous infant with invasive GBS disease. 
GBS bacteriuria during any trimester of the current pregnancy. 

423 

wi, ———gm  e= e =a  — cs — eo 



CHAPTER Vil: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

Listeria monocytogenes 
Listeria is non spore forming Gram positive bacilli that spread widely in nature; in GIT of 
animals, plants, water and soil and transmitted to humans by contact with animals or their 
feces. 
Human listeriosis is caused by Listeria monocytogenes as a zoonotic disease (sporadic 
cases or small epidemics). 
Listeria monocytogenes is a Gram positive, non- spore forming short bacilli characterized 
by tumbling motility at 22 °C but not at 37 °C. 
The organism can grow at 4°C (replication continues in refrigerated food) 
L.monocytogenes is a facultative intracellular parasite that infects and multiplies in 
epithelial cells, macrophages and other parenchymal cells. 

Mode of transmission: 
Animals are the reservoir of Lysteria monocytogenes 

Listeriosis is primarily a food-borne disease. It is transmitted to humans by ingestion of 
unpasteurized milk products, undercooked meat, and raw vegetables coleslaw 
(cabbage). 
It is transmitted to the fetus or a newborn as a result of transmission across the placenta 
or during delivery from infected mothers 
Contact with domestic farm animals and their feces is also an important source. 

Pathogenesis: 
Following ingestion, the bacteria appear in the colon and then can colonize the female 
genital tract. | 
From this location, they can infect the fetus if membranes rupture or infect the neonate 
during passage through the birth canal. 
Newborns infected at the time of delivery can have acute meningitis 1 to 4 weeks later. 
The bacteria reach the meninges via the bloodstream (bacteremia). 
The pathogenesis of Listeria depends on the organism’s ability to invade and survive 
within cells. 
Upon entering the cell, the organism produces listeriolysin, which allows it to escape from 
the phagosome into the cytoplasm, thereby escaping destruction in the phagosome. 
o Attachment of the organism to the cytoskeleton proteins of infected cells facilitates 

transfer of bacteria to adjacent cells. 
o Due to this mode of cell-cell transmission, the organisms are never extracellular and 

are not exposed to humoral antibacterial agents (e.g., complement, antibodies) or 
polymorphic nuclear leucocytes. 

o Immunity to L. monocytogenes is primarily cell mediated. 
The most significant virulence factor is listeriolysin O; it disrupts the phagocytic vacuole and 
is vital in cell-cell transmission of the organism 
Clinical presentations 
Neonatal Disease 
e Early onset disease: 

o ltis acquired trans-placental. 
o In utero acquired infection (granulomatosus infantiseptica): abscesses and 

granulomas in multiple organs and very frequently results in abortion, intra uterine 
fetal death or death after delivery. 

424



CHAPTER VII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

e Late onset disease: 
o Itis acquired at birth or soon after birth (hospital or attending personnel). 
o Exposure on vaginal delivery may result in meningitis or meningo-encephalitis with 

sepsis within 2 to 3 weeks. 

eo Immunosuppressed individuals and elderly: 
o Meningitis, endocarditis and sepsis. 
o [tis one of the leading causes of bacterial meningitis in patients with cancer and in 

renal transplant recipients. 
Laboratory Diagnosis 
Specimens: CSF or blood for blood culture (cold enrichment can be used) 
e Microscopic examination of a Gram stained film (CSF): shows intracellular Gram-positive 

bacilli occurring singly or in pairs. 
e [solation & Identification: 

o Culture on blood agar: beta hemolytic colonies. 
o The colonies can be identified by: Gram stained film, the characteristic tumbling 

motility and catalase test (catalase positive). 

Fungal meningitis 
Cryptococcous neoformans 
(cryptococcal meningitis) 

Antigenic Structure: 
lt is capsulated Oval, budding yeast that contains capsular polysaccharide according towhich 
it is divided into 5 serological types: A, B, C, D, and AD. 

Pathogenesis and clinical picture: 
e The organism is transmitted by inhalation of dust contaminated with bird droppings 

especially pigeons (No human-to-human transmission) 
e Birds are not infected 
e In most cases, phagocytes in the lungs limit spread of the organism resulting in 

asymptomatic infection, in some cases patient develops flu like symptoms or pneumonia 
e Unlike other forms of fungal meningitis, it affects healthy people as well as those who are 

sick or immunocompromised 
¢ In patients with reduced cell-mediated immunity (AIDS patients and transplant recipients) 

it spreads causing chronic meningitis or meningoencephalitis 

e The pathogenesis of Cryptococcus is also enhanced by the ability of the yeast to produce 
melanin, which appears to inhibit phagocytic killing mechanisms 

Laboratory Diagnosis: 
Specimen: CSF. 

e Direct film stained with India ink stain: budding capsulated yeast cells are seen 
e Culture: On Sabouraud’s dextrose agar (37° for 3 days), it gives whitish, highly mucoid 

colonies that furtherly identified by biochemical reactions 
eo Capsular antigen can be detected by the latex particle agglutination test in CSF or in blood 

in AIDS patient, this test is called the cryptococcal antigen test, often abbreviated as 
“crag.” (highly sensitive and specific). 

425 

ee =ia  nSE e eEy e Et  =. ——= — ———— — 



CHAPTER VII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

Other fungi causing CNS infections 
Aspergillus species 

Aspergillus spp. is an opportunistic fungus. The most commonly isolated species is Aspergillus 
fumigatus. 

Morphology and characters 
e Aspergillus is saprophytic opportunistic fungi found in soil, plants and grows as a mold on 

decaying vegetable matter. 
e [t has branching septate hyphae and produces numerous spores on the tips of long 

conidiophores. 

Disease and risk factors 
eo Exposure to Aspergillus in the environment may cause disseminated disease in highly 

immunosuppressed individuals. 
e Aspergillus invasion of the CNS may result in brain abscess, cerebritis, and meningitis. 
e Aspergillus hyphae can invade directly into the vessel wall, which becomes weakened due 

to necrosis and polymorphonuclear infiltration, resulting in mycotic aneurysm formation. 
These patients may present with typical subarachnoid hemorrhage syndrome. 

e¢ The most important risk factors for brain infection are neutropenia and corticosteroid use. 
In addition, immunocompromised, organ transplant recipients, oncological, 
haematological, and AIDS patients also are at higher risk. 

Pathogenesis 
e The primary portal of entry for Aspergillosis organisms is the respiratory tract. 
e Infection reaches the brain by hematogenous dissemination from invasive lung infection, 

or by direct extension from the ear, paranasal sinuses, or mastoids in patients with 
localized invasive aspergillosis. 

e A very important virulence factor of Aspergillus spp. is its ability to produce mycotoxins 
which can damage and kill microglia, astrocytes, and neurons. These mycotoxins inhibit 
phagocytosis and increase conidial resistance to opsonization. 

Clinical manifestations 
e (Clinical presentation of Aspergillus infection of the CNS is non-specific and varies 

depending on the extension of the infection. 
e Patients may present with a variety of signs and symptoms, such as fevers, headaches, 

d lethargy, altered mental status, seizures, abnormal gait, dizziness, or focal neurological 
findings (e.g. hemiparesis, dysarthria). 

Laboratory Diagnosis 
Specimen: biopsy from CNS lesion. 
A. Microscopic examination: 

- With KOH: shows branching septate hyphae. 
- Fluorescence microscopy: Calcofluor stain for tissue biopsy. 

B. Isolation: Aspergillus species grow on most media. They're incubated for a few days at 
room temperature. Colonies are identified according to morphology of conidia. A. 
fumigatus produces a fluffy to granular, white to blue-green colony. 

C. Antigen testing (galactomannan) and molecular testing on cerebrospinal fluid. 

426



CHAPTER VIL: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

Treatment: Surgical resection of cerebral lesions in combination with antifungal therapy with 
voriconazole. 

Mucor and Rhizopus species 

These are saprophytic organisms found on bread, soil, air, and decaying vegetation, especially 
in tropical countries. 

Disease and risk factors 
e The major clinical form is rhinocerebral mucormycosis. Other forms of the disease are 

less frequent: cutaneous, pulmonary, disseminated, and gastrointestinal. 
e Rhinocerebral mucor mycosis is an acute invasive infection of the nasal cavity, paranasal 

sinuses, and orbit that involves the facial structures and extends into the CNS, involving 
the meninges and brain. 

e Most of these infections occur in patients with metabolic acidosis, particularly diabetic 
ketoacidosis, and those with hematologic malignancies. 

Pathogenesis 
e Infection is caused by the inhalation of spores present in the air. 
e The disease is characterized by fungal hyphal invasion of blood vessels resulting in 

thrombosis and infarction of the nasal, paranasal sinus, orbital, and cerebral tissues. 

Clinical manifestations 
The most common symptoms include headache, especially in the face, periorbital oedema, 
often with loss of vision, fever, diplopia, rhinitis, and decreased mental function. 

Laboratory Diagnosis 
A. Direct examination of biopsy specimens, and surgical resection specimens mounted in 

KOH with calcofluor white reveals the broad aseptate hyphae. 
B. Isolation: These fungi grow rapidly on laboratory media, producing abundant cottony 

colonies. Identification is based on the sporangial structures. 

Treatment 

Amphotericin B remains the first-line therapy, often supplemented by surgical debridement 
and immune reconstitution. 

427 



CHAPTER Vill: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

Aseptic meningitis andp oliomyelitis 
Aseptic meningitis is also known as viral meningitis, to indicate that no bacteria are detected 
in CSF. {t is the most common form of meningitis except in children younger than 10 years of 
age, where bacterial meningitis is more common. 
Signs and symptoms: 

- Usually a milder disease than either bacterial or fungal meningitis. 
- Although signs and symptoms may be the same, death from viral meningitis is rare. 
- Some meningitis viruses also cause skin rashes, sore throats, and colds. 

Table 8.2: Summary of common viral etiology of meningitis 

VVii rus 
=. 

Eon ds Neonates. "HSV-2 Acquired at time 
DNA viruses | teenagers of birth 

ot with & young Sexual contact 
ge LO icosahedral | adults 
RR capsid 

Young Airborne droplets & 
children direct contact 
Reactivation | Vesicular fluid in zoster 
of virus in patients can be the 
Zoster source of varicella in 

susceptible 
children. 

| Paramyxoviridae Large Young 
| enveloped {(-) | children Usually acquired from 

sense respiratory secretions & 
ssRNA saliva via droplet or 
spherical or contact 
pleomorphic 
shaped 

Ja particles 
| Flaviviridae Enveloped From birds (natural 

| (+) sense reservoir) to human 
ssRNA virus by Culex mosquito 
with 
icosahedral 
capsid 

428



==2h RA=S Rais. | 

CHAPTER Vil: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

| Retroviridae Enveloped Blood and blood 
| (+) sense products 

sSRNA virus Sexual contact 
with cone Perinatal, 
shaped transplacental, breast 
capsid feeding 

Transmission and epidemiology of Enteroviruses: 

~ Transmitted primarily by the fecal-oral route 
e Respiratory aerosols also play a role in Coxsackie viruses’ transmission 
oe They replicate in the oropharynx and the intestinal tract. 
& Humans are the only natural hosts. 
® Coxsackie virus infections occur worldwide, primarily in the summer and fall. 

ENTEROVIRUS Entry via aerosol--5558 
PATHOGENESIS of ingestion — 4 Replication 

tonsils 

—E—— 

Sponsor visi a | Primary viremia 
~T arget tissue | circulation 

— ee SS ao = 
——————— 

Replication 

Virus in feces 

Fig. 8.2: Pathogenesis of Enteroviruses 

Control 
e No available antiviral drugs 
e |[VIG can be used in outbreaks, neonatal infections or severe infections in 

immunocompromised individuals. However, the efficacy is uncertain. 
e There is no vaccine available mainly because of the multiplicity of serotypes. 

Laboratory Diagnosis of viral meningitis: 
Specimens: Detection of viral nucleic acid in CSF is the most sensitive and specific method for 
prompt diagnosis of viral meningitis. 

Poliomyelitis 
Polioviruses 
Properties and classification: 
o Three serologic {antigenic) types based on different antigenic determinants on the outer 

capsid proteins. 
¢ Reaction to physical and chemical agents inactivated by heating at 55°C for 

30 minutes, proper pasteurization, chlorination (0.1 ppm for drinking water) 

429 



CHAPTER Vill: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

Transmission and epidemiology: 

e Fecal-oral transmission 

e Natural infection occurs only in man. 
e Because of the success of the vaccine, poliomyelitis caused by naturally occurring “wild- 

type” virus has been eradicated from the Western hemisphere. 
Pathogenesis and immunity: 

¢ Source of infection: Apparent and subclinical patients. 
e Primary multiplication takes place in oropharynx and intestinal mucosa (alimentary 

phase). The virus then multiplies in the tonsils and Peyer's patches (lymphatic phase). 
Most infections stop at this level (asymptomatic or subclinical). 

e Only in about 1% of infections, viremia occurs {viremic phase), the immune system may 
stop the disease here by forming neutralizing antibodies resulting in abortive 
poliomyelitis. 

e Nervous system may be invaded through the blood stream (neurologic phase) the virus 
may reach the meninges (aseptic meningitis or non- paralytic polio) or poliovirus spread 
along axons of peripheral nerves to the central nervous system (anterior horn cells of 
the spinal cord) and it multiplies in the anterior horn cells resulting in paralytic 
poliomyelitis. 

e Neural spread may occur if a child with an unapparent infection had 
tonsillectomy, the virus in the oropharynx gains access to cut nerve fibers. 

e The immune response consists of both intestinal IgA and humoral IgG to the specific 
serotype. Infection provides lifelong type-specific immunity. 

e [Immunity to one serotype does not confer significant immunity to the other serotypes. 
The virus replicates in the oropharyngeal and intestinal mucosa 

No further spread of virus Virus spreads to spinal cord > Paralysis 
Asymptomatic or mild and bran 
Febrile undifferentiated illness 

Fig. 8.3: Pathogenesis of poliovirus infection 

430



CHAPTER VIII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

Clinical findings: 
The range of clinical findings of poliovirus infection includes: 

1. Asymptomatic or subclinical infection. 
2. Abortive poliomyelitis: 

e [ncubation period: 7-14 days 
e Fever, malaise, drowsiness, headache, nausea, vomiting, constipation and sore 

throat 
e The most common presentation that recovers in few days 

3. Non-paralytic poliomyelitis (aseptic meningitis): 
e [n 5% of cases presenting with fever, headache and neck stiffness 
e Lasts 2-10 days usually followed by complete recovery 

4. Paralytic poliomyelitis develops in 1% of cases in the form of: 
e Flaccid paralysis 
e Fatal respiratory paralysis in brainstem involvement 

- 

e Flaccid paralysis is the predominating complaint with maximal recovery within 6 
months leaving minor residual paralysis that may lead to post poliomyelitis muscle 
atrophy. 

Laboratory diagnosis: 
1) isolation of the virus: 

e Virus can be isolated from throat swabs (early in disease course), rectal swabs and 
stools (longer period). 

e Specimens are inoculated onto primary monkey kidney tissue culture (MKTC) or 
human cells. 

e¢ CPE occurs within 3-6 days. 
e The isolated virus is serotyped by Nt test using specific antisera. 

2) Serology: 
e Paired serum specimens are taken to show a rise in specific antibody titer detected 

by ELISA or neutralization test 
Treatment: 

oe No specific antiviral therapy is available. 
eo Symptomatic relief and respiratory support if needed 
Prevention and control: 
1. Preventing fecal contamination of drinking water and food plays an important role 
2. Avoid operations in children with fever. 
3. Gamma globulin can protect against paralytic disease if given before infection or before 

nervous lesions. 
Vaccines: There are two vaccines available. 
e Oral polio vaccine (OPV live, attenuated, Sabin, 1957) 
e |nactivated poliovirus vaccine (IPV, Salk, 1954) 
Sabin vaccine (OPV) 
e Live attenuated magnesium chloride stabilized containing the three poliovirus strains 

grown in human or monkey diploid cell cultures. 
e |tcan be kept at 4°C for a year. 
Advantages of OPV: 

1. Administered easily by oral drops in three doses at 2, 4, 6 months of age and a booster 
dose at 4-6 years of age. 

431 



CHAPTER VIII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

. Effectiveness (The normal response rate to OPV is close to 100%). 

. No need for repeated booster doses 

. Lifelong immunity 

., OPV multiplies in the intestine, producing not only IgM and IgG antibodies in the blood 
but also secretory IgA in the intestine. Thus, protecting GIT from reinfection and the CNS 
from subsequent invasion by the wild virus 

6. The attenuated virus is shed in the stools of immunized children. Persons being exposed 
to fecal material of vaccinated children may be exposed and infected with vaccine virus 
leading to development of herd immunity. 

Disadvantages of OPV 
1. Can mutate to more virulent strain 
2. Unsafe administration for immunodeficient patients 
3. Not given to feverish children to avoid the interference by another enterovirus virus 

infecting the gut at the same time, thus blocking both the vaccine virus replication and 
immunity. 

4. Must be kept refrigerated to avoid heat inactivation of the live virus 
Salk vaccine (IPV) 
e itis formalin killed vaccine containing the 3 poliovirus strains, grown in human or monkey 

cell cultures. 
e Itis administered IM in 3 doses at 2, 4, 6 months 
e No local intestinal immunity (no IgA) 

Advantages of IPV 
1. Cannot undergo genetic virulence 
2. Safe administration in immunodeficient patients 

Disadvantages of IPV 
1. Requires parenteral administration 
2. Need for booster vaccine for lifelong immunity. Confers immunity only after 4 boosters 
3. Lack of induction of local intestinal immunity (no secretory IgA) 
4. Expensive 

432 

Li BB WN 



CHAPTER Vill: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

Drug Therapy of Meningitis 

Meningitis is inflammation of meninges. it can be classified according to causative agent 
into bacterial “Purulent” and non—bacterial “Aseptic” meningitis. 

Table 8.3.) Classification of meningitis according to etiolo 

|. Bacterial Il. Non-bacterial 

‘Purulent meningitis’ ‘Aseptic meningitis’ 

Bacterial infections Viral meningitis (mosty), 
others: Mycobact., Drugs.., 8yst. Dis.. 

Less Common Most common 

{Increased inflammation Less inflammation, Mild 
Higher ICP & BBB impair. or No ICP, BBB impair. 

Fig. (8.4) Meningitis pathology 
extremely serious I Least serious 

may — Death or brain usually resolve without 
damage even if treated treatment 

Drug-induced Aseptic Meningitis “DIAM” 
- DAMS is non-infectious meningitis. 

-1t is a rare but challenging diagnosis, most commonly reported with nonsteroidal anti- 
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), antibiotics such as Trimethoprim /sulfamethoxazole (TMP- 

SMX), and also with biologic drugs such as intravenous immunoglobulin (IVIG). 

- DIAM is poorly understood and may be related to hypersensitivity reactions, usually 

associated with autoimmune diseases e.g., SLE, Rheumatoid A .... 

- Treated by Immediate cessation of offending medications with excellent prognosis. 

Pathogenesis of Bacterial Meningitis and Site of Drug Action (figure 8.6....) 
Bacteria enters the CNS through the cribriform plate or blood stream — Bacteria colonize in 
the subarachnoid space = intense inflammation of the meninges = release of inflammatory 
cytokines and chemokines leading to f intracranial pressure (ICP) by: 

e¢ Endothelial damage = TM permeability of BBB—> 1° ICP (Vasogenic edema). 
eo tNeutrophils entry to subarachnoid space and produce inflammatory exudate —= 

obstruction of CSF flow, > 1° ICP (Interstitial edema) 
e swelling of cellular elements of the brain through the release of toxic factors from the 

bacteria and neutrophils => 1 ICP (Cytotoxic edema). 

-Also, inflammatory cytokines lead to vasculitis disrupting blood flow = ischemic damage. 

433 

= es P= t —— ee E— — . Ii = LS ~ —_—= —— er 
_— EE Ea — —_—— — = - SEE EEE =



CHAPTER Vili: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

- The 1 ICP, Brain edema and ischemia = characteristic clinical picture of meningitis and 
Neuronal damage e.g., damage to cranial nerve VIll —hearing loss, Seizure .... 

. Me 
Bacterial Oura mater} 
Meningitis 

“1 ICP, edema (VIC) 
+ BBB Permeability 
f inflam. Cytokines 

Neuronal Damage 

Severe ———e cl ~~ phonophoba 

WW Seizure (10%) 

rome ¥ a — Red or purple 
and stiffness 5° SH rash 

n ge 25%97  - v Rp, 
- iazepam Coldhands —— |;  od 5173 Ml 

§ vomiting 

> HighFever 

consciousness 

Fig. (8.5) Pathogenesis of Bacterial Meningitis and Site of Drug Action 

Accordingly, drug therapy of bacterial meningitis consists of: 

Antibiotic therapy (Empirical and then Pathogen-specific) 
Anti-inflammatory therapy (Corticosteroids as Dexamethasone) 
ICP lowering agent (Mannitol; Osmotic diuretic) 
Anticonvulsant drug (e.g., Diazepam if patient has seizure) 

Practical guidelines for Management of Bacterial Meningitis (IDSA%, 2017) 
Once Suspected Must begin treatment and take CSF samples and do other investigations to 
confirm diagnosis. Steps of managements: 

, Initial Management (Immediate Dexamethasone + Empiric Antibiotic) 
Il. Pathogen-Specific Antibiotic Therapy for Bacterial Meningitis 
IH. Chemoprophylaxis for Bacterial Meningitis. 

® Infectious Diseases Society of America's Clinical Practice Guidelines for Healthcare-Associated Ventriculitis 
and Meningitis (2017) 

434

Pe BMpe  



CHAPTER Vili: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

I. Initial Management of Suspected Bacterial Meningitis: “IDSA Rule” 
immediate DexamethaSone + Antibiotic (ABCDEF) 

Antibiotic, Broad, Parenteral, Cidal, Combination, 2-3 Days, Empirical, Full dose 

Dexamethasone 
- Dexamethasone {0.15 mg/kg/6h, 1V) is given 10 - 20 min before or concomitantly with 
antibiotic (All patients > 6 weeks) for first 2-4 days. 
- Mech. & Value: |, inflammatory response & J, cytokine-mediated neurotoxic 2 |, Brain 
edema & |, Neuronal damage -» Improve outcomes = J, Neurological sequelae, |, hearing 
loss and |, mortality in S. pneumoniae. (Cochrane Review, 2015). 
Empirical Antibiotic “AB” 
AB used must be broad spectrum, bactericidal and based on the patient's age, risk factors and 
clinical features. 
AB should be administrated in full dose intravenously “IV”. 
Intrathecal injection may be used in Nosocomial meningitis or if patients do not respond to 
IV especially with AB poorly cross BBB e.g. Gentamycin, Vancomycin BUT NOT with penicillins 
or cephalosporines = neurotoxicity & seizures. 
NEVER postpone AB even 1h (It takes 12 - 24 h to change CSF) and continue Empirical AB for 
the first 2-3 days till CSF results. 
If CSF results revealed aseptic meningitis => antibiotics can be discontinued. 
If CSF results confirm bacterial meningitis and determine pathogen — Pathogen-specific 
Antibiotic therapy should be administered for 7-21 days. 

Table (8.4.): Empirical Antibiotics in Suspected Bacterial Meningitis 

Population Likely Pathogen Empirical Antibiotics 

< 1 month Streptococcus Agalac Ampicillin + Cefotaxime 
(GBS), Listeria M, E. Coli, | Or 
other G-ve Bacilli Ampicillin + Gentamycin 

1-23 months | Streptococcus Pn., N Vancomycin+ Ceftriaxone 
2-50 yrs Meningitidis, S. Agalac Or 

(GBS), H. influenzae Vancomycin + Meropenem 
> 50 yrs or | Streptococcus Pn., Vancomycin + Ceftriaxone + 
| immunity, Listeria M, N Meningitidis, |A mpicillin (Triple) 
Al Aerobic G-ve bacilli Or 
coholism Vancomycin + Meropenem 

Penetrating | Coagulase —ve Staph. Vancomycin + Cefepime 
Traumaor | (CoNS)as MRSA .... Or 

NgurosLlg ery | | Aerobic G-ve bacilli Vancomycin + Meropenem 
SF shumt (as Pseudomonas) 

435

> 



CHAPTER Vil: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

ll. Pathogen-Specific Antibiotic Therapy for Bacterial Meningitis 

Once a Pathogen is Identified, Specific Antimicrobial Agent(s) Should be Administered 
according to the following table: 

Table (8.5): Pathogen-Specific Antibiotic Therapy for Bacterial Meningitis 

Pathogen Recommended Alternative 
(TTT Duration) Antibiotic Antibiotic 

1. Strept. pneumoniae | -Penicillin MIC: < 0.1 ug/ml Meropenem, 
(10-14 d) Penicillin G (or Ampicillin) Moxifloxacin, or 

~-Penicillin MIC: 0.1-1 ug/ml Chloramphenicol 

Ceftriaxone 
-Penicillin MIC: 2 2 ug/ml or 
-Ceftriaxone MIC: 2 1 ug/ml 
Ceftriaxone + Vancomycin? 

2. N. Meningitidis -Penlicillin MIC: < 0.1 ug/ml Meropenem, 
(7 d) Penicillin G (or Ampicillin) Moxifloxacin, or 

-Penicillin MIC: > 0.1 ug/ml Chloramphenicol 
Ceftriaxone | 

3. H. influenzae - B-Lactamase -ve: Ampicillin Meropenem, 
(7-10 d) - B-Lactamase +ve: Ceftriaxone | Moxifloxacin, or 

Chloramphenicol 

4. Strept. Agalac Penicillin G (or Ampicillin)b2¢ | Vancomycin or 
“GBS” (21 d) Cefotaxime 

5. Listeria Monocyt. Ampicillin + Gentamicin® (TMP-SMX) 
(21 d) 

6. Enterobacteria Ceftriaxone + Gentamicin® Meropenem or 
E. Coli (21 d) Moxifloxacin or 

7. Pseudomonas A R/ Cefepim Meropenem, 
(21 d) Ciprofloxacin 

8. Staph. aureus If methicillin-susceptible: Nafcilin | Daptomycin or 
(14 d) If methicillin-Resistant (MRSA) Linezolid 

Vancomycin® 

May add Rifampin: Vancomycin CSF penetration may be diminished by dexamethasone. 
Some guidelines (AAP) recommend adding gentamicin to ampicillin in GBS for Synergy. 
€ Gentamicin is used in the 1%* 7-10 days to {, risk of Nephrotoxicity or Ototoxicity. 

436



CHAPTER VIII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

Common Antibiotics dose used in treatment of Bacterial meningitis 

Iand ult 
e Ampicillin 2 g gq4h {hourly if Listeria is suspected) 
eo Ceftriaxone 2 g q12h or cefotaxime 2 g q4h 
e Vancomycin 15 mg/kg q8h (to achieve trough levels of 15-20 ug/mL) 
In Children 
e Ampicillin 50-100 mg/kg q6h 

Ceftriaxone q12-24h or cefotaxime q6-8h (75-100 mg/kg) 
Aminoglycoside (gentamicin 2.5 mg/kg or tobramycin 2.5 mg/kg) q8h 
Vancomycin 15 mg/kg q6h 
Chloramphenicol (25 mg/kg orally or IV every 12 hours) not commonly used due to 
risk of fatal aplastic anemia and Grey baby syndrome (in Neonate). 

lil. Chemoprophylaxis for Bacterial Meningitis 

Table (8.6) Prophylactic antibiotics in Bacterial Meningitis (Indications and Doses) 

Pathogen Indication Antibiotic (dose) 

1. H. Influenzae 1- All household contacts Rifampin (4 days) 
“Hib” 2 — un- or incompletely 20 mg/kg/day, up to 

vaccinated child <2y 600 mg/day 
(Postexposure) 

“No Need If Full Hib Vaccinated” 
2. N. Meningitidis | 1- Close contact (>8 hours) with | Rifampin (2 days) 

N. meningitidis case Alternatives (single 
(Postexposirg) 2 - Contact with oral secretions | dose) 

of N. meningitidis case -Ceftriaxone (125- 
250 mq, IM) 

“No Need If contact from >14 d” | -Ciprofloxacin 
(500mg, adult) 

3. Strept. Agalac | 1- Previous birth to an infant Penicillin G 
“GBS” with invasive S. agalactiae 5 M units lV, then 2.5 

infection -3Munits/4 h 
(Intrapartum in | 2- Colonization at 35-37 weeks 
Women) 3- Bacteriuria in pregnancy If Allergy to 

4- High risk: penicillin 

Fever(>38°C), Amniotic fluid -Cefazolinoer 
rupture >18 h, labor < 37 W. -Clindamycin 

Prophylaxis antibiotics should be given to contacts within 24 h of the patient's diagnosis 

437 

Ee — —



CHAPTER Vii: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

Management of Non-Bacterial Meningitis 

I. Viral Meningitis 

- Self-limiting (need supportive treatment), BUT 
antiviral may be used in immune deficiency as HIV 

- In Herpes simplex meningitis: 

R/ Acyclovir 

Il. Fungal Meningitis 

- For Candida meningitis: 

R/ Liposomal amphotericin B + 5-flucytosine 

- For Aspergillus meningitis: 

R/ Voriconazole 

N.B. Liposomal amphotericin B achieves higher CNS conc. and less nephrotoxic 
than conventional amphatericin 8 

Ill. Tuberculous “TB” Meningitis 

A combination of 1° line anti-TB drugs 

(9-12 months); 

Isoniazid, pyrazinamide, Rifampin, Ethambutol and 

streptomycin (doses as Pulmonary TB) 

438



CHAPTER VI: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

VIRAL ENCEPHALITIS 

Encephalitis is an infection of the brain parenchyma predominantly caused by viruses. 
Sometimes both the brain and the meninges are involved, a condition called 
meningoencephalitis. 
Life threatening disease with cerebral dysfunction 

Etiology and pathogenesis 
1. Herpes simplex viruses: 

eo HSVs are the most common cause of severe sporadic meningoencephalitis. 
e They cause disease following primary infection of infants (usually HSV-2) or due to 

reactivation of HSV-1 following immunosuppression in adults. 
¢ The infection is localized to the temporal andfrontal lobes so computed tomography 

(CT) scans and electroencephalograms (EEGs) are diagnostic aids. 

Varicella zoster virus. 

Rabies virus. 

Arboviruses:West Nile Virus (WNV) is the most common arboviral cause of 
encephalitis in the United States. St. Louis encephalitis virus, the LaCrosse strain of 
California encephalitis virus, and Eastern and Western equine encephalitis viruses (EEE 
and WEE, respectively) can also cause encephalitis. 

Cytomegalovirus (CMV) causes encephalitis primarily in immunocompromised 
individuals such as AIDS patients and those receiving immunosuppressive drugs. 

Epstein-Barr virus (EBV): as a rare complication of infectious mononucleosis. 

HIV: 
e HIV encephalitis refers to cognitive impairment resulting from cerebral infection by the 

human immunodeficiency virus. 
e HIV virus gain entrance to the nervous system within monocytes which easily traverse 

the blood brain barrier 
e Infected monocytes then fuse with resident microglial cells, resulting in activation with 

release of cytokines and other molecules which result in secondary brain injury. 
e |n addition, HIV associated glycoproteins may interfere with synaptic activity. 
e HIV also infects astrocytes and this might be linked to development of HIV associated 

dementia. 
All viruses reach brain via blood except HSV type 1 and rabies reach brain via axons 

8. Post-infectious encephalitis: 
e A milder form of encephalitis which follows immunization or infection by several 

weeks. 
e Immunopathological mechanisms perhaps involving autoimmune reactions to CNS 

antigens are thought to be responsible as in cases of subacute sclerosing 
panencephalitis. 

e Influenza B, VZV, and adenovirus have been implicated in conjunction with salicylates 
in Reye’s syndrome. 

43S 



CHAPTER Vil: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

Clinical manifestations: 
e The main clinical manifestations of encephalitis include fever, headache, and altered 

mental status, as well as seizures and focal neurologic deficits. 
e The clinical distinction between meningitis and encephalitis is based upon the state of 

brain function. 
e Seizures can be seen with meningitis alone and should not be considered as definitive 

evidence of encephalitis. 
e Personality change, hallucinations, and aphasia suggests temporal lobe localization 

in HSV encephalitis. 
e Manifestations of Rabies encephalitis (furious rabies and dumb rabies), with coma and 

death as the final common pathway in both forms 
Laboratory diagnosis: 
1. CSF analysis: variable findings 

oe A mild elevation in CSF lymphocytes can be seen along with an elevation of protein 
and a normal glucose. 

e A normal CSF pattern can also be seen in encephalitis. 
2. PCR-based testing of CSF: 

e Commonly used to determine a specific etiology, such as with HSV and VZV. 
e The single most useful test in diagnosis of HSV encephalitis. 

3. Detection of antibodies in the spinal fluid or blood. 
4, Radiographic findings can be useful as well. In particular, in HSV encephalitis, 

temporal lobe abnormalities are frequently seen. 
5. Diagnosis of Rabies 
Treatment: 
e [Intravenous acyclovir is the treatment of choice for HSV-1, HSV-2, and VZV 

encephalitis. 
eo Ganciclovir is used for CMV encephalitis 
e¢ There is no antiviral therapy for arboviral or rabies encephalitis. 
Prevention: 
eo There is no vaccine for HSV-1, HSV-2, and WNV. 
e¢ To reduce the transmission of HSV-2 to the neonate, pregnant women with active lesions 

late in pregnancy should receive acyclovir and should be considered for Cesarean section. 
e¢ Pre- and post-exposure prophylaxis of Rabies 
Outcomes: 
e¢ Outcomes are variable depending on etiology. 
e WNV is associated with significant morbidity and mortality. 
e Mortality of HSV encephalitis before acyclovir was 60% to 70%, and with treatment 

approximately 30% 
e Cognitive disability, seizures, and motor deficits are common sequelae seen 

among survivors 

440 

=. 



Co 
CHAPTER Vill: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

Arboviruses that cause Encephalitis 

West Nile Virus 
Epidemiology: 
e [tis endemic in Africa but has caused encephalitis in areas of Europe and Asia as well 

Transmission: 
Reservoir: Wild birds are the main reservoir of this virus 
Vector: transmitted by mosquitoes, especially Culex species 
Humans are dead-end hosts. 
Transmission of the virus via solid organ transplants or blood transfusion has also 
occurred. 

Clinical presentation: 
» 80% of infections are asymptomatic. 
» fever and headache without encephalitis occur in about 20% of infections. 
» The most important clinical picture is encephalitis with or without signs of meningitis 

in only 1% of infections. 
Laboratory diagnosis: 
1. WNV encephalitis is often diagnosed by finding WNV specific IgM in the spinal fluid. 
2. Isolation of the virus from brain tissue, blood, or spinal fluid or by detection of antibodies 

in spinal fluid or blood. 
3. PCR-based assays are also available. 
Prevention 
1. No vaccine is available. 
2. To prevent blood-borne transmission, screening of donated blood for the presence of 

WNYV using nucleic acid probes specific for the virus. 
3. General measures for vector control and personal protection. 
Treatment: 
1. No available antiviral therapy. 
2. Hospitalization and intravenous fluids, respiratory support, prevention of secondary 

infections, and good nursing care. 

RABIES ENCEPHALITIS 

Rabies virus 
e¢ The virus has a broad host range. 
e It can infect all mammais causing lethal form of acute encephalitis. 

Transmission: 
1. The bite of rabid wild animal as dogs, cats and bats 

Rabid animal manifests aggressive biting behavior induced by viral encephalitis. 
2. Non bite exposure: 

a- Exposure to aerosols of bat secretions containing rabies virus 
b- Corneal transplantation taken from an infected cadaver. 

441 



CHAPTER Vii: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

a: J brain via nervetso 
other tissues such as 
eye, kidneys, salivary 

glands 

4 Virus replicates in 

dorsal root ganghon 3 Vius infects nerve in 
and tre p spinal | 
{sues a . iy peripheral nervous 

7 At system 
Li Moves by refrograde 

= V2 irus replicateisn 
muscle ats ite of bite 

Fig. 8.6: Pathogenesis of rabies 

Pathogenesis: 
1. The virus multiplies at the site of inoculation, infects the sensory neurons and moves by 

axonal transport to the central nervous system. 
2. During its transport within the nerve the virus is sheltered from the immune system and 

little if any immune response occurred. 
3. Within the CNS encephalitis develops with neuronal death. Infected neurons contain 

Negri bodies (intracytoplasmic eosinophilic IB) which are pathognomonic of rabies. 
4. The virus multiplies in the CNS then migrates through peripheral nerves to salivary glands 

and other organs. 
S. From salivary gland, it enters saliva to be transmitted by the bite. 
6. Viral replication is restricted almost exclusively to neuronal tissue and there is no viremia. 

_— 

Fig. 8.7: Negri bodies pathognomonic of rabies 

442 

a ls Ds. we 



CHAPTER Vii: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

Clinical Picture 
e [.P ranges from 2-16 weeks. 
e |.P is shorter with bites in children and in head and neck and langer with bites in the 

limbs. 
e The patient exhibits a prodrome of non- specific symptoms as fever, anorexia headache 

and changes of sensation at the site of the bite. After the prodromal 
e phase rabies manifests as either of two forms 

1. Furious rabies: occurs in 80% of cases. The brain is involved. There is excitement, 
delirium, seizures and hydrophobia that is aversion to swallowing water 
because of painful spasms of pharyngeal muscles. 

2. Paralytic rabies: The spinal cord is primarily involved and an ascending paralysis 
occurs. 
Death invariably occurs following both forms. 

Laboratory Diagnosis: 
>» There are no laboratory tests to diagnose rabies infection in humans after exposure to 

bite and before the onset of symptoms. 
» Several tests are necessary to diagnose rabies ante-mortem (before death) in humans; 

no single test is sufficient 

1. Direct Virus Demonstration: 
Specimen: Saliva, serum, spinal fluid, and skin biopsies of hair follicles at the nape of the 
neck 

a. DIF for direct detection of antigen. 
b. RT-PCR for detection of viral RNA. 

2. Viral Isolation: 
e Suckling mice or on human diploid cell culture. 
e |nfection of mice results in encephalitis and death. 
e Brain tissue of the dead animal is examined for detection of Negri bodies and virus 

antigen. 
3. Serology: 

Serum and CSF antibodies can be detected late during disease progression by using 
immunofluorescence or neutralization tests. 

4. Postmortem diagnosis: 
L/M examination for detection of Negri IB in the brain or spinal cord. 

Management of Rabies: 
1. Immediate washing of bite wounds and scratches with generous amounts of soap and 

water. 
2. Wound should not be sutured immediately. Sutures should be placed after local 

infiltration of antiserum. 
3. Tetanus immunization should also be considered. 
4. Initiation of rabies post-exposure prophylaxis (PEP) according to vaccination status: 

A. Unvaccinated Persons or Vaccination was administered more than 5 years 
previously or incomplete: 
e A combination of RIG and vaccine is recommended for both bite and non- bite 

exposures, regardless of the time interval between exposure and initiation of PEP. 

443



CHAPTER VI: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

e Discontinue PEP if the animal that caused the exposure was captured and proved 
to be non-rabid by laboratory diagnostic testing (i.e., the direct fluorescent 
antibody test) 
Although no human-to-human non-transplant transmission has been 
documented clearly, anyone coming into contact with CSF, saliva, or mucus 
membranes of a person suspected of having rabies should receive complete 
prophylaxis. 

Rabies immunoglobulin: 
Human or equine antirabies serum is given once iM on day 0. 
Much as possible of the HRIG should be infiltrated into and around the wound, 
and the remaining is given IM frequently in the gluteals. 
If HRIG was not administered on day 0, it can be administered up to and including 
day 7. 

Rabies Vaccine: 
Four doses (1-ml), given IM, usually in deltoid on days (0, 3, 7, 14,) 

B. Completed the schedule of rabies vaccine within last 5 years: 
Two doses (1- ml) of the vaccine are given IM on days (0, 3). 

vianagement of rabies 

1-Wash wound 

2-Tetanus immunization 

3-postexposure prophylaxis 

unvaccinated or vaccinated more than 5 vaccinated within last five years 
years ago or incomplete dose of 

Booster dose of vaccine 
vaccination 

(2 doses) 
rabies immunoglobulin and full dose of 

vaccination ( 4 doses) 

Fig. 8.8: Management of Rabies 
Rabies Vaccines: 
¢ Alf vaccines for human use contain inactivated rabies virus grown in cells derived 

from human, monkeys or duck embryo. 
é Human diploid cell vaccine (HDCV) is regarded as the gold standard for rabies 

vaccination. 
Pre-exposure vaccination: 

eo Three doses of the vaccine given on day 0,7,21 or 28. 
e Few of the people should consider rabies pre-exposure vaccinations: 
1. High-risk individuals (veterinary doctors, animal handlers and laboratory workers) 
2. Travelers to a country where rabies is widespread must consider pre-exposure 

prophylaxis if: 
o They will visit remote areas where medical care is difficult to obtain (for example, 

hiking through remote villages where dogs are common). 
o Their stay is longer than 1 month. 

444 



CHAPTER VI: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

Prevention and Control 
1. Eliminate stray animals as much as possible and vaccinate domestic dogs and cats. 
2. Avoid wild and unknown domestic animals. 
3. Follow pre-exposure and post-exposure recommendations. 
Slow CNS infections 
1. Measles virus: 

e Subacute sclerosing panencephalitis (SSPE). 
e Develops 1 to 10 years after the initial infection. 

2. JC virus: 
 Arare syndrome known as progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML). 
e (Occurs in immunocompromised patients, notably AIDS patients and patients on 

immunosuppressive therapy. 
e |nfection with JC virus occurs early in life and remains latent until the immune 

system is compromised. 
Diagnosis: Detection of viral DNA in the CSF by PCR. 

e There is no antiviral drug therapy and no vaccine. 
3. Prions: 

e Kuru and variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (vCID): 
e Progressive brain disorders involving typical spongiform histological changes in 

affected areas of the brain. 
Mode of Transmission: 

They are transmitted by inoculation or ingestion of prion-containing beef. 
e Corneal transplant and transplant of dura mater of an infected cadaver can also transmit 

the infection. 
Pathogenesis: 
e The disease is caused by a misfolded form of a normal prion protein, thereby altering 

the function of the protein, and leading to death of neurons. 
eo The disease is confined to the CNS where death of neurons causes vacuolation and 

spongiform changes in the brain. 
Clinical presentation: 
e Gradual onset, slowly progressive dementia, and myoclonus. 
e Severe disease resulting in coma and death. 
Laboratory Diagnosis: 
¢ Brain biopsy shows spongiform changes. 
e No serologic tests are available, and Prions cannot be grown in culture. 
Prevention and Treatment: 
e Infected animals should be slaughtered, and their carcasses destroyed. 
e No available treatment or vaccine is present. 

445 



CHAPTER Vill: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

PARASTES AFFECTING CENTRAL NERVOUS SYSTEM 

PATHOGENIC FREE- LIVING AMOEBA 
INTRODUCTION 
e They are normal inhabitants of soil and water (fresh or stagnant lakes) where they feed 

on bacteria. 
e Few members have the ability to become facultative parasites when an opportunity to 

enter a vertebrate exists. 
There is no direct human to human infection. 
They have no relationship with poor sanitation. 
They have no definitive host, reservoir host or insect vector. 
The most important potentially pathogenic free-living amoebae are: Naegleria fowleri 
and Acanthamoeba species. 

1. NAEGLERIA FOWLERI 
(PRIMARY AMOEBIC MENINGOENCEPHALITIS (PAM)) 

MORPHOLOGY: 
Naegleria fowleri has two stages (three forms) in the life cycle: 

1. Trophozoite stage: it occurs in two forms (biphasic): 
a. Amoeboid form (Fig. 8.9a): 

It is the dividing form. 
It measures 7-20 u. 
Has a broad end and a narrow tapering end. 
Moves by the help of broad pseudopodium (lobopodia). 
Cytoplasm is differentiated into a clear ectoplasm and a granular endoplasm that 
contains contractile vacuoles. 

eo The presence of large central nuclear karyosome surrounded by a halo is the 
characteristic feature of the trophozoite. 

It is the only form found in man in C.S.F. or in the tissues. 

Fig. 8.9: Trophozoite Forms of Naegleria fowleri 
a) Amoeboid form, b) Flagellated form 

446



CHAPTER VII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

b. Flagellated form (Fig. 8.9b): 
e [tis a temporary non dividing, non-feeding form of the parasite formed when the 

amoeboid stage is exposed to change in water ionization. 
e [tis pear shaped having at least two flagella with the same nuclear character. 
e Changes to amoeboid form in unfavorable conditions before encystation (this 

change occurs in water at 27-37°C). 

2. Cyst stage (Fig. 8.10): 
e |tis the resistant stage of the parasite. 
e¢ |[t measures 7-15 um. 

e Spherical with single nucleus and a thick double wall. 
Cyst is not seen in clinical specimens because the course of the 
disease is so rapid and fatal before the trophozoite can encyst. 

LIFE CYCLE (Fig. 8.11): Fig. 8.10: Cyst stage 
1. Naegleria fowleri is a free-living thermo-tolerant amoebo-flagellate parasite. 
2. The amoeboid trophozoite is the feeding and multiplying form. 
3. When food is scarce, the amoeboid trophozoite transforms to the biflagellate 

trophozoite. 
4. The biflagellate is a transient non-multiplying, rapidly motile form; it moves rapidly 

searching for food. 
5. Interconversion between the two forms of the trophozoite occurs frequently in 

response to change in the environmental conditions (mainly, presence of food). When 
the conditions are unfavourable, e.g. in cold environment, the biflagellate form 
transforms into the amoeboid form before changing into cyst. 

AMEBA 

Ss. ENCYSTMENT 
LS % 
LY % 

INFECTION BY INTRANASAL y 
INSTILLATION OF AMEBAE “ 

AMEBAE 
IN CSF 

& J Wesailchanns 

FLAGELLATE A 

Fig. 8.11: Life cycle of Naegleria fowleri 

447 

ty ———————— ———————— 

- 
= = 



CHAPTER VII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

HABITAT: 
Outside the human body they are free living in warm aquatic environment in fresh or brackish 
water (lakes, rivers, and ponds). On infection of man, they inhabit the brain. 
MODE OF INFECTION AND INFECTIVE STAGE: 
Man acquires the infection by swimming or diving in warm fresh water lakes contaminated 
with Naegleria fowleri amoeboid trophozoites (infective stage) (Fig. 8.9) 
EPIDEMIOLOGY: Worldwide distribution. 
PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL PICTURE: 
e [t is an acute suppurative rapidly fatal and fulminant infection of the brain meninges 

resulting from invasion of the brain tissue by the pathogenic free-living amoeba, Naegleria 
fowler. 

eo Termed as Primary as CNS is primarily involved to be differentiated from secondary 
amoebic encephalitis caused by Entamoeba histolytica. 

e The organisms penetrate the nasal mucosa, migrate via the olfactory nerve =» cribriform 
plate = to enter the meninges, where they multiply in the peri-vascular spaces causing 
suppurative meningoencephalitis (PAM). 

e Naegleria fowleri injures nerve cells by two mechanisms: 
1. Trogocytosis, which is ingestion of the cytoplasm through a feeding cup. 
2. They produce contact dependent lysis: acute necrotising meningoencephalitis. 

Clinically The condition is commonly seen in children and young adults (immuno-competent) 
with a history of swimming, diving, or jumping into warm fresh water, stagnant ponds, or 
lakes, or inadequately maintained public heated swimming pools. 
e Incubation period: 2-5 days. 
e Onset: Acute onset. 
e Symptoms and signs: 

1. There is alteration of taste and smell. 
2. High fever with sensory and motor changes. 
3. Increase of the intracranial tension = severe headache, neck rigidity. 
4. Coma and death within few days. 

PROGNOSIS: is very poor, most cases are fatal. 
DIAGNOSIS: 
a. Clinical diagnosis: 

History of contact with water and clinical picture. 
The physical signs are similar to those of bacterial meningitis, but the change of taste and 
smell may help for differentiation. 

b. Laboratory diagnosis: 
1. Complete blood picture: shows polymorph nuclear (PMN) leucocytosis (differentiates 

it from viral encephalitis). 
2. CSF examination: Cerebrospinal fluid obtained by lumbar puncture: 

i. Naked eye appearance: cloudy, purulent, or bloody and under tension. 
ii. Increased protein content and decreased or normal glucose content. 

iii. Microscopic examination: 
¢ Bacteriologically free. 
e Increased PMNs and lymphocytes. 
e Detection of the motile amoeboid trophozoites by examination of Wet mount 
and stained smear. 

448

Ih 



CHAPTER VIII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

iv. Culture: Non-nutrient agar seeded with gram negative bacilli (Escherichia coli). 
Diagnostic stage: Amoeboid trophozoite (Fig. 8.9a). 

3. Detection of the parasite's DNA by PCR. 

TREATMENT: 
1. Treatment must be given early enough to save the patient's life. 
2. AMPHOTERICIN B is given by slow intravenous infusion in a dose of 1 mg /kg /day for 9 

days &1mg intrathecally on alternate days until CSF is clear. 

PREVENTION and CONTROL. 

1. Hold your nose shut or use a nose clip if you jump or dive into the fresh water lake or 
pond. 

2. Always keep your head above water in hot springs and other naturally hot water. 

2. ACANTHAMOEBA SPECIES 
(GRANULOMATOUS AMOEBIC ENCEPHALITIS (GAE)) 

MORPHOLOGY: 
Two forms exist: 
1. Amoeboid trophozoite (Fig. 8.12): 

e Size: 22-30 um. 

e Shape: irregular with spine-like pseudopodia. 
e Content: single nucleus with large central karyosome 

and a single contractile vacule. 

2. Cyst (Figure 8.13): 
e Rounded. 

e About 18 pin diameter. 
e With double wall with a slightly wrinkled outer cyst wall 

and a polyhedral inner cyst wall. 
e Cysts are dispersed by wind to contaminate the 

environment. 

Fig. 8.13: Cyst 
LIFE CYCLE: 
The life cycle of Acanthamoeba consists of two stages: 
1. An actively feeding and dividing trophozoite. 
2. Adormant cyst. 
Cyst formation occurs under unfavourable environmental conditions such as: food 
deprivation, desiccation, and changes in temperature and pH. 
HABITAT: 
It is present in all types of environment throughout the world: stagnant water, dust and soil. 
It may contaminate contact lenses, and dialysis machines. In humans, the parasite might be 
encountered in the CNS, skin, eye, lung and genitourinary tract. 

449 



CHAPTER VIII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

MODE OF INFECTION AND INFECTIVE STAGE: 
Both cysts and trophozoites ( infective stages ) can enter the body through various means. 

eo The eye causing severe keratitis in otherwise healthy individuals particularly contact 
lens users 

e The nasal passages to the lower respiratory tract 
e Ulcerated or broken skin 

When it enters the respiratory system or through the skin, it can invade the central 
nervous system by hematogenous dissemination causing granulomatous amebic 
encephalitis (GAE) or disseminated disease in individual with compromised immune 
system 

PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL PICTURE: 

¢ Acanthamoeba is an opportunistic pathogen, occurs in immunosuppressed chronically ill 
patients with AIDS, tuberculosis, radiotherapy and chemotherapy or to immuno- 
privileged sites (away from the immune system e.g. cornea). 

e Tissue invasion is slow leading to subacute or chronic iliness and marked granulomatous 
tissue reaction. 

A. GRANULOMATOUS AMOEBIC ENCEPHALITIS (GAE): 
e [tis a rare subacute or chronic granulomatous infection of the CNS that occurs in 

immunosupressed patients where the parasites reach the brain via blood. 
eo The amoebae produce patchy lesions of granulomatous reaction formed of areas 

of necrosis, haemorrhages and focal oedema. 

e The amoebae produce injuries by: 
a. Contact mediated lysis of the cells. 
b. Ingesting cytoplasm of the cells. 

Clinically: 
e¢ The onset is gradual with I.P weeks or months (chronic course). 
oe Symptoms and signs of increased intracranial tension: 

1. Severe frontal headache. 
2. High fever, nausea, and vomiting. 
3. Neck rigidity. 
4. Sensory and motor changes and mental confusion. 

e Skin lesions may associate CNS manifestations and may include ulcers, nodules, 
or subcutaneous abscesses. 

B. AMOEBIC KERATITIS AND CORNEAL ULCER (Fig. 8.14): 
e |t occurs in healthy individuals. 
e Patients who use contact lenses are at special risk. 
e The condition starts following trauma to the cornea 

with the use of lenses and subsequent exposure to 
water contaminated with trophozoites or cysts. 

Clinically: 
1. It is a chronic progressive ulcerative disease of the eye. 
2. Painful ulcer of the cornea, congested conjunctiva, 

complete corneal opacity and blindness, Fig. 8.14: Amoebic keratitis 
3. Disease is increasing due to frequent use of contact lenses. 

A450 



CHAPTER VIN: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

C. DISSEMINATED GRANULOMATOUS AMOEBIC DISEASE: 
1. It begins as a nodule followed by ulceration. 
2. It may be accompanied by granulomatous lesions in the eye, ear, genitourinary 

tract, and internal organs with or without associating GAE. 
DIAGNOSIS: 
A. Clinical diagnosis: History and clinical picture. 
B. Laboratory diagnosis: 

1. GAE: 
a. Brain biopsy is the most reliable diagnostic approach in GAE. Trophozoites and cysts 

can be detected in stained smears of biopsy specimens. 
b. Culture: Acanthamoeba trophozoites and cysts can be cultured from clinical samples 

(CSF, biopsy tissue) on non-nutrient agar with a Page’s saline and Escherichia coli 
overlay. 

c. CSF examination: 
i. Microscopic examination: 
e Bacteriologically free. 
e [ncreased lymphocytes. 
e Examination of wet mount and stained smear for trophozoites and cysts which 

are rarely seen in CSF. 
il. Increased protein content and decreased or normal glucose content. 

2. Acanthamoeba keratitis: Examination of corneal scrapings for trophozoites and 
cysts by wet mount, stains, histopathologic examination and culture. Contact 
lenses and their solutions can also be cultured. 

3. Disseminated disease: Skin biopsy. 
TREATMENT: 
GAE: Antimicrobial combinations are used: Sulfadiazine (50 mg/kg IV) + Ketoconazole or 
Fluconazole + Pentamidine + Flucytosine. 
Amoebic keratitis: Topical chlorhexidine (0.02%) and polyhexamethylene biguanide (0.02%), 
either alone or in combination. If the epithelium alone is involved, debridement may be 
sufficient for cure. Penetrating keratoplasty may be necessary in cases that do not respond to 
medical treatment. 
PREVENTION AND CONTROL OF AMOEBIC KERATITIS : 

1. Proper cleaning of contact lenses. 
2. No wearing of lenses while swimming. 

Table 8.7: Differences between Meningioencephalitis caused by Naegleria and 
Acanthamoeba spp 

cm AR 

~~ |Naegleria ~~ | Acanthamoeba 

Aetiological agent | Naegleria fowleri A. culbertsoni, A. castellani, A. 
polyphagea and A. astronyxis 

Route of infection | Nasal mucosa Skin, eye, genitourinary tract 

Course Acute, fatal Chronic, usually non-fatal 

Pathology Acute suppurative inflammation | Chronic granulomatous 

Patient Usually affects healthy Affects immunocompromised 
persons individuals 

451 

es — me — —e———— Ee _. T——



CHAPTER Vil: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

LARVAE OF CESTODES 

A- SPIROMETRA MANSONI 

Spirometra mansoni is an adult cestode that inhabits the small intestine of dogs and cats. 
Its larval stage is called Sparagnum. 
The sparganum has a solid, elongated, glistening white body, few mms up to 30 cm in length 
with invaginated scolex (Fig. 8.15). 
Intermediate hosts of Spirometra mansoni: 
1st intermediate host: Cyclops (water flea). 
2" intermediate host: Frogs, snakes, birds, mammals and occasionally man, containing the 

larva known as Sparganum mansoni. Human acts as a blind intermediate host. 

SPARGANOSIS 
ETIOLOGY: 
It is a disease resulting from Infection of human tissues by the larval stage of the 
pseudophyllidian tapeworm Spirometra mansoni calied Sparganum mansoni. 
Man acts as a blind end intermediate host. 
EPIDEMIOLOGY: 
The disease is prevalent in South East Asia, North and South America, Australia, and East 
Africa. 
MODE OF INFECTION AND INFECTIVE STAGE: 
1. Drinking water containing Cyclops infected with procercoid larva. 
2. Eating raw or undercooked frogs or birds containing the 
Sparganum which migrates from the frogs or birds’ tissues 
through the intestinal mucosa to various organs. 

3. Applying the infected flesh of frogs as poultices to inflamed 
tissues as skin or eye. The Sparganum larva will migrate to 
the hot inflamed tissues. The use of frog tissues as pouitices Fig. 8.15: Sparangum of 
is common in some countries as China. Spirometra mansoni 

PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL PICTURE (Fig. 8.16): 
Wherever it settles, the Sparganum larva induces chronic inflammatory reaction ending in a 
swelling formation. Symptoms depend on the tissue invaded and the number of larvae. The 
common sites are subcutaneous tissues, eye, lymph glands and CNS. 

1. Skin: migratory subcutaneous swelling which may become painful and tender to form 
abscesses from which the Sparganum is discharged. 

2. Eye: conjunctivitis and peri-orbital oedema. 

452



CHAPTER Vil: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

Fig. 8.16: Skin and eye manifestations of Sparganosis 

3. Patient may suffer from urticaria, oedema, fever, pain and eosinophilia. 
4. Cerebral sparganosis: symptoms include seizures, fatigue, confusion, headaches, 

memory loss, coma, fever, paresthesias, hemiparesis, motor weakness, and other central 
nervous system symptoms. The infection generally involves the cerebral hemispheres, 
especially the frontoparietal lobes, and in some cases extends to the cerebellum. The 
disease may appear as a massive cerebral hemorrhage. 

DIAGNOSIS: 
a. History of the use of frogs or drinking infected water. 
b. CT and MRI are helpful in confirming the site of the lesion. 
c. Definitive diagnosis is achieved by biopsy and removal of the swelling which cabne 

identified as a Sparganum larva from its morphology. 

TREATMENT: 
Surgical removal of the nodule containing the Sparganum. 

PREVENTION AND CONTROL: 
1. Destruction of Cyclops by boiling or filtering the water before drinking. 
2. Stopping the use of raw frogs as poultices. 
3. Proper cooking of frogs and birds ‘meat. 

B- CYSTICERCOSIS 

ETIOLOGY: 
It is a disease resulting from invasion of human tissues by the larval stage of Taenia solium 
(Cysticercus cellulosae). Man acts as a blind intermediate host. 

EPIDEMIOLOGY: 

e The parasite is common in Central and South America, most of sub-Saharan Africa, 
South Asia and China. 

e Araund 50000 people die annually from cysticercosis, mostly due to 
neurocysticercosis (NCC). The presence of cysticerci in the brain represents the most 

453 



CHAPTER Viil: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

frequent parasitic infection of the human nervous system and one of the most 
common causes of adult-onset epilepsy throughout the world. 

MODE OF INFECTION AND INFECTIVE STAGE: 
Ingestion of Taenia solium eggs (infective stage) (Fig. 8.17) by one 
of the following ways: 
1. Heteroinfection: ingestion of eggs of Taenia solium in foods or 

drinks contaminated by stools of persons infected by the adult 
worm. 

2. Autoinfection of a person having the adult worms in his 
intestine. Fig. 8.17: Taenia solium eggs 
a) External autoinfection: hand to mouth infection. 
b) internal autoinfection or retrofection (due to reverse peristalsis): some detached 

segments may ascend by antiperistaitic movements to the stomach then descend 
again to the intestine where onchospheres hatch and penetrate intestinal mucosa 
then to the circulation to various tissues where they change into Cysticercus 
cellulosae. 

PATHOGENESIS AND CLINICAL PICTURE: 
While the most common sites for infection are the skeletal muscles and brain,L ysiicerd may 
be found in almost any tissue of the body, including the | ls sookx 
eye, lungs and subcutaneous tissues. Developing cysts Owl 4 
elicit a host inflammatory response resulting in fibrous y 
encapsulation. The cysticercus {Fig. 8.18) is an ovoid, milky 
white bladder with the head invaginated into the bladder. 
The bladder worms measure 5 mm {ong by 8 to 10 mm 
wide, except in brain or submeningeal spaces where they Cysticercus cellulose 
can have a volume of about 60 ml. Fig. 8.18: Cysticercus cellulosae 

The effect produced depends on the location of cysticerci in the body. 
1. Muscular cysticercosis: cysticerci located in skeletal muscle result in nodule formation, 

but they are usually asymptomatic. 
2. Ocular cysticercosis: subconjunctival swelling (Fig. 8.19) or may cause damage to the 

retina, iris or choroids resulting in visual disturbances. 
3. Neurocysticercosis (Fig. 8.20a):Neurocysticercosis may be parenchymal (occurring in 

the brain substance, the most common location) or extraparenchymal {occurring in the 
meninges, the ventricles, the basilar cisterns, or the subarachnoid space of the brain or 
spinal cord). 

Clinical manifestations of neurocysticercosis vary with the locations of the lesions, 
the number of parasites, and the host's immune response. When the larvae are found in 
the brain, symptoms can result from actual larval invasion of the brain tissue and/or 
death of the organism, which stimulates tissue reactions around the larvae. Symptoms 
vary from mild manifestations as headache, vomiting, vertigo to convulsions and 
epilepsy, with epilepsy being the most common manifestation. Other less common 
manifestations include abnormal behaviour, transient paresis, intermittent obstructive 
hydrocephalus, disequilibrium, meningoencephalitis and cranial nerve abnormalities. 

454 



CHAPTER VIM: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

Fig. 8.1 9: Ocular cysticercosis Fig. 8.20 a) Neurocysticercosis, b) Hole-with-dot sign. 

DIAGNOSIS: 
e Diagnosis often requires both CNS imaging and serological testing. 
e Cysticercosis should be suspected in any patient living in an endemic area who develops 

nervous manifestations, subcutaneous nodules and myositis especially if the patient 
harbors adult T. solium in the intestine. 

e Antibodies detection tests in serum and antigen detection tests in CSF. 
e [maging techniques: CT scan is superior to MRI for demonstrating small calcifications. The 

presence of cystic lesions demonstrating the scolex is considered pathognomonic of 
neurocysticercosis. The scolex is visualized by both CT and MRI as a bright nodule within 
the cyst producing the “hole-with-dot” appearance (Fig.8.20 b). 

e Stool Examination: For eggs of T. solium as taeniasis and neurocysticercosis coexist in 10- 
15% of patients with neurocysticercosis. 

e CSF analysis: Abnormal findings are found in about 50% of cases if cysticerci are found in 
the ventricles or basal cisterns. These findings include high eosinophils, elevated protein 
and normal or low glucose levels. 

e Definitive diagnosis can be reached by surgical removal of the cysts to be examined 
histologically for the presence of suckers and hooks on the scolex of cysticerci. 

TREATMENT: 
1. Albendazole is recommended in a dose of 15 mg/kg/day in divided doses with meals, for 

8 days is very effective especially for active brain cysts. OR 
2. Praziquantel 50mg/kg/day in three divided doses for 15 days. 
3. Simultaneous administration of steroids is essential to relieve the intense local 

inflammatory reactions of the antigenic material of dead larvae. 
4. Antiepileptic drugs for patients with seizures. 
5. Surgical treatment, if possible, usedi n removal of orbital, cisternal and ventricular cysts. 
PREVENTION AND CONTROL: 
1. Early detection and treatment of patients harboring adult T. solium. 
2. Environmental sanitation 
3. Personal hygiene to avoid autoinfection. 
4. Protection of food or drink against possible contamination by human faeces containing 

the eggs. 

455 



CHAPTER Vill: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

OTHER IMPORTANT PARASITIC INFECTIONS OF THE CNS: 

1) Toxoplasma gondii 
a. In immunocompromised hosts { toxoplasma encephalitis }: 

Toxoplasma gondii (T. gondii) can cause cerebral infection in immunocompromised 
patients especially AIDS patients (opportunistic infection). 
Toxoplasma encephalitis occurs through one of the following route: 

1. Reactivation of latent cysts that had occurred earlier in life. 
2. Eating undercooked meat of animals harboring tissue cysts . 
3. Consuming food or water contaminated with cat feces harboring oocysts 
4. Blood transfusion or organ transplantation 

Symptoms: Fever, headache, vomiting, confusion, speech difficulty, behavioural 
changes, and seizures. 
Signs: Focal neurological deficits, ataxia, cranial nerve deficits, visual field defects, 
altered mental status and seizures. 
Investigations: 
a. CD4+ count: variable; typically, <0.1 x 10°/L {<100 cells/microlitre). 
b. CT and MRI: Single or multiple ring-enhancing lesions. 
c. Toxoplasma serology (IgG); Positive. However, antibody detection may be 

unreliable in immunodeficient individuals. 
d. CSF analysis: Mild lymphocytic pleocytosis, elevated protein and normal or low 

glucose. 
e. Detection of T. gondii DNA in CSF by PCR. 
f. Brain biopsy: Indicated in patients who fail to respand ta empiric treatment. 

Treatment: 
Pyrimethamine + sulfadiazine + folinic acid for life or until immune reconstitution. 

b. Congenital toxoplasmosis: 
Toxoplasmosis can be transmitted from mother to fetus if the pregnant woman is 
infected for the first-time during pregnancy. The severity of fetal damage is higher 
when infection occurs early in pregnancy. When infection occurs in the third trimester 
of pregnancy, the majority of the newborns are asymptomatic. However, they may 
develop CNS manifestations as learning disabilities, mental retardation or seizures as 
well as chorioretinitis later in life. When congenital infection is severe, newborns may 
have a typical triad of microcephaly or hydrocephalus, intracerebral calcifications and 
chorioretinitis. 

Detection of IgG in the newborn is not a marker of infection since maternal IgG crosses 
the placenta from mother to fetus. On the other hand, specific IgM and IgA are 
manufactured by the fetus in response to active infection and are therefore important 
markers of infection in the newborn. 

4) Hydatid disease of the CNS caused by Echinococcus granulosus. 

3) Cerebral malaria caused by Plasmodium falciparum. 

4) Sleeping sickness caused by African Trypanosomes. 

5) Amoebic brain abscess caused by Entamoeba histolytica. 

456 



CHAPTER VIII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

PATHOLOGICAL ASPECTS OF CNS INFECTIONS 

As previously discussed, infectious agents may reach the nervous system through blood, 
trauma, local extension from osteomyelitis, infected sinuses or teeth or through peripheral 
nerves 

Epidural and subdural infections: 
>» These spaces can be involved with bacterial or fungal infections, usually as a consequence 

of direct local spread. 
>» Epidural abscesses arise from an adjacent focus of infection, such as sinusitis or 

osteomyelitis. 
» Infections of the skull or air sinuses may also spread to the subdural space, producing 

subdural empyema. Large subdural empyema may produce a mass effect. In addition, 
thrombophlebitis may develop in the bridging veins that cross the subdural space, 
resulting in venous occlusion and infarction of the brain. 

Meningitis 

Meningitis is an inflammatory process involvitnhge leptomeninges, if the infection spreads 
into the underlying brain it is termed meningoencephalitis. 
Causes 

tji l-18124} A Lie LAMIGW NY INEGI. 

General clinical features of meningitis: 
Fever. 

Headache, irritability. 
Photophobia. 
Cranial nerve deficit. 
Altered mental status. 
Neck stiffness. 

A- Acute pyogenic meningitis (bacterial meningitis): 
Etiologic agents and mode of infection: refer to the Microbiology section. 
Gross: 
e A suppurative exudate is evident within the leptomeninges over the surface of the 

brain (Fig. 8.21a). 
e The meningeal vessels are engorged and prominent. 
eo CSF is mixed with pus. 
Microscopic (Figure 8.21b): 
e Meningeal vessels are congested and dilated. 
e The subarachnoid space is filled with fibrin, neutrophils, pus cells and histiocytes. 
CSF changes: Table 8.8. 

457



CHAPTER VIII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

Effects and complications: 
Local: 
e [ncreased intracranial tension. 
e Meningeal fibrosis may cause obstruction of the foramina of Lushcka and Magendie, 

leading to hydrocephalus in children and manifestations of increased ICT in adults 
with damage of cranial nerves; mainly lil, IV, Vi leading to diplopia, squint and ptosis. 

e Encephalitis. 
e¢ Thrombosis of blood vessels. 
General: Septicemia leads to infective endocarditis or acute adrenal insufficiency 
"Waterhous Friedrichsen Syndrome”. 

p FS ry ¥ [TW al - wg 
> . T= = ¥ | n i | gr ¥ 

r¥ y gd A=— -=  wo il : bo . 1 = a fm Y 5 wad & 
= + =1 Foe 0 “ LF 

wr - ly 3 
iJ  a 

| Fig. 8.21: Acute pyogenic meningitis: 
Left: Grossly, pus is covering the brain surface with dilated vasculature. 

Right: Microscopically, numerous neutrophils are seen in the subarachnoid space. 

B- Viral (Aseptic) Meningitis: 
- common viral etiology of meningitis: refer to microbiology section 
- The clinical course is less fulminant than in pyogenic meningitis. 
- There are no distinctive macroscopic characteristics except for brain swelling, seen in 
only some instances. 

- On microscopic examination, there is either no recognizable abnormality or a mild to 
moderate leptomeningeal lymphocytic infiltrate. 

- CSF changes: See table 8.5. 
C- Granulomatous (Mycobacterial/ Fungal) Meningitis: 

» CSF changes: See table 8.8 
» Tuberculous meningitis: 

- Infection with Mycobacterium tuberculosis also may result in a well- circumscribed 
intraparenchymal mass (tuberculoma). 

- The subarachnoid space contains a gelatinous or fibrinous exudate, most often at 
the base of the brain, obliterating the cisterns and encasing cranial nerves. There 
may be discrete white granules scattered over the leptomeninges. 

- Chronic tuberculous meningitis is a cause of arachnoid fibrosis, which may produce 
hydrocephalus. 

» Fungal Meningitis: 
- Usually found in immunodeficient patients. 
- Please refer to microbiology section. 

458 



CHAPTER VII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

CNS Parenchymal Infections 

A- Brain Abscess 

Brain abscesses are mostly caused by bacterial infections. 

Brain abscesses can arise by: 
1. Direct implantation (traumatic). 
2. Local extension: e.g. suppurative mastoiditis or acute suppurative otitis media. 
3. Hematogenous (systemic pyemia): 

a- Acute bacterial endocarditis. 
b- Suppurative lung diseases via vertebral system of veins. 

Morphology: 
e Acute abscess appears as an irregular area of liquefactive necrosis surrounded by a zone 

of congestion. 
e Chronic abscess has a smooth fibrous tissue capsule surrounded by a zone of reactive 

gliosis. 
¢ Ring-enhancing lesions on CT/MRI. 

Clinical: 
e Progressive focal deficits. 
e Increased ICT and progressive herniation which may be fatal. 
e Abscess rupture can lead to ventriculitis, meningitis and venous sinus thrombosis. 

Fig. 8.22: Brain abscess: gross appearance and radiograph with ring pattern of 
enhancement 

B- Viral Encephalitis 

e [t is infection of the brain that is invariably associated with meningeal inflammation 
(meningoencephalitis). 

e The most characteristic histologic features are perivascular and parenchymal mononuclear 
cell infiltrates, microglial nodules and neuronophagia. 

e Certain viruses may form inclusion bodies e.g. Rabies has characteristic Negri bodies. 
eo Numerous viruses can affect the CNS (refer to microbiology and virology section). Only 

those occasionally encountered in surgical neuropathology practice are going to be 
shortly discussed: 

459 



CHAPTER Vill: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 

SYSTEM 

(a) Human immunodeficiency viru1s  (HIV-): 
» Up to 60% of patients with AIDS develop neurologic symptoms and 

neuropathologic changes have been observed in 80 - 90% of cases. 
» HIV can have direct effects on the nervous system as well as setting the stage for 

opportunistic infections or tumors (primary CNS lymphoma) that can involve the 
nervous system. 

» Patterns of direct injury to the brain include: 
o HIV -1 aseptic meningitis. 
o HIV-1 meningoencephalitis (AIDS dementia). 
o Vacuolar myelopathy. 

(b) Progressive Multifocal Leukoencephalopathy (PML): 

» Caused by JC virus, a papovavirus. 
» Virus infects oligodendrocytes and astracytes, resulting in demyelination. 
» Occurs in immunosuppressed patients e.g. Transplant, HIV. 
» Irregular, ill-defined destruction of white matter. 
» Poor prognosis. 

(c) Herpes Simplex Virus (HSV) Encephalitis: 

Herpes Simplex Virus type 1: 
» More common in children and young adults. 
» inferior and medial regions of the temporal lobes and orbital gyri of the frontal 

lobes, causing alterations in mood, memory, and behavior. 
» Cowdry type A intranuclear viral inclusion bodies can be found in both neurons and 

glia. 
Herpes Simplex Virus type 2: 
» Presents as meningitis in adults. 
» Presents as diffuse encephalitis in neonates born by vaginal delivery to mothers 

with active HSV genital infections. 

— 

Fig. 8.23: Herpes simplex encephalitis: 
Left: MRI shows classic bilateral, asymmetric involvement of the medial temporal lobes 

and right insula in herpes encephalitis. 
Right: intranuclear viral inclusions appear either as discrete haloed eosinophilic masses 
{Cowdry A) or as homogenous inclusion transformation of the entire nucleus. Both 

neurons and glia are affected. 

460



CHAPTER VIII: INFECTIONS AFFECTING MUSCLE TONE & NERVOUS 
SYSTEM 

C- Fungal Encephalitis 

e Candida albicans, mucormycosis, aspergillus fumigatus, and Cryptococcus neoformans are 
the most common fungi that can cause encephalitis. 

e Although most fungi invade the brain by hematogenous dissemination, direct extension 
from sinuses may occur, particularly with mucormycosis, in diabetics. 

e Parenchymal invasion, in the form of granulomas or abscesses. 
e Aspergillus causes a widespread septic hemorrhagic infarction due to invasion of blood 

vessel walls with subsequent thrombosis. 

D- Parasitic Diseases 
» Cerebral Toxoplasmosis: 
» Cysticercosis: 
» Others: e.g. Amebiasis, hydatid cysts. 

Refer to parasitology 

E- Other CNS Infections 

e A wide range of other organisms can infect the nervous system and its covering e.g. 
neurosyphilis and prion disease. 

e Unlike in other infectious diseases, the agent in prion diseases is an abnormal form of a 
cellular protein. 

Table 8.8: CSF Findings in meningitis 
Opening pressure WBC count Protein | Glucose 

| Normal* 100- 180 mm of H2 (8- 15 mm | 0-5 cells <40 40- 
Hg) with patient lying on the | (lymphocytes) mg/dI 70mg/dI 
side /microl 
clear colorless 

Acute bacterial "turbid 7 PMNs ? | 
Viral " to moderate = clear | lymphocytes | IN to 

mild | 
Tuberculous Usually © but can be low with | | lymphocytes | | v 

spinal block 
Slightly opaque cobweb 
formation 

Fungal "clear " Mixed v 
Cysticercosis™* Often | butcan be lowwith | = with f + (in 20% 
(esp. cases of block by cyst eosinophils (in of cases) 
intraventricular/ 50% of cases) 
subarachnoid 
infection) 
Naegleria fowleri | polymorphs 1 LorN 

& lymphocytes 
Acanthamoeba I lymphocytes N or 
species slightly 
carcinomatosis Nto mononuclear + | " often | Nto 

malignant cells | very high 
* Normal CSF parameters are different in neonates. 
** ELISA for anticysticercal antibodies is helpful. 

461 



— 
ABER. PS ¥ 

CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE& DEMYLANATING DISEASES 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Chapter —- IX 

NEURODEGENERATIVE & 

DEMYLINATING DISEASES, TRUMA, 

VASCULAR DISORDERS & TUMORS 

462 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE& DEMYLANATING DISEASES 
TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & DEMYLINATING 
DISEASES, TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs): 

By the end of this chapter the student should be able to: 

Define neurodegenerative diseases. 
Enumerate the types of neurodegenerative diseases. 
Explain the pathogenesis and describe the morphology of Alzheimer’s disease. 
Identify the most important pathologic characteristics of frontotemporal lobe 
dementia, Huntington disease'and Parkinson’s disease. 
Define phospholipids and classify them. 
State phospholipid functions in the body. 

Identify the structure and types of sphingolipids, structure of sphingomeline and 
glycosphingolipids. 
Describe the steps of sphingolipids synthesis and degradation. 
Describe diseases related to myelin: sphingolipidosis and demyelinating diseases. 
Identify the broad categories of myelin diseases. 
Explain the pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis and describe its morphology and 
clinical features. 
Recognize that drug therapy of Alzheimer Disease aims to correct neurotransmission 
defect involved in the pathophysiology of the disease. 
Predict the adverse effects of anticholinesterase inhibitors. 
Realize the role of memantine in management of Alzheimer Disease. 
Provide the drug therapy of acute multiple sclerosis episode. 
Discuss the disease modifying drugs of multiple sclerosis (MS) and amyotrophic 
lateral sclerosis. 
Identify types of traumatic parenchymal injury and their clinical effect. 
Identify types of traumatic vascular injury regarding causes and their clinical effects. 
Define cerebral edema and explain its pathogenesis and describe its gross features. 
Identify patterns of cerebral ischemia (global and focal) and enumerate the causes 
and clinical outcome. 
List the morphologic changes of global cerebral ischemia and brain infarction. 
List the types and causes of intracranial non- traumatic hemorrhages. 
Describe types of cerebral aneurysms and list their effects. 
Identify various forms of vascular malformations and their main pathologic features. 
Describe the classification of CNS tumors and identify the general concept of their 
grading. 
Identify the main pathologic characteristics of various types of CNS tumors. 

o Identify the genetic base of von Hipple Lindau disease and list its sites of involvement 
as an example of familial tumor syndromes. 

ee —— mm —— — — 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE& DEMYLANATING DISEASES 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

NEURODEGENERATIVE DISEASES 

DEFINITION: Degenerative diseases of the CNS are disorders characterized by the cellular 
degeneration of subsets of neurons that typically are related by function, rather than by 
physical location in the brain. Many of these disorders are associated with the accumulation 
of abnormal proteins. 

They can be classified in a number of different ways including via the clinical presentation, 
type of protein that accumulates, pathological processes and underlying genetic 
abnormalities. 

Types of Neurodegenerative diseases based on their clinical presentation and area of the 

nervous system affected (Fig. 9.1): 
1- Diseases that affect the cerebral cortical neurons result in loss of memory, language, 

insight, and planning, all components of dementia (Alzheimer’s disease and 
frontotemporal dementia). 

2- Those that affect the neurons of the basal ganglia result in movement disorders. 
{Parkinson's disease and Huntington chorea). 

3- Those that affect the cerebellum result in ataxia (Spinocerebellar ataxias). 
4- Those that affect motor neurons result in weakness (Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis). 

La] 

; Akinetic-rigid diseases, 
itt predominantly affecting 

Se —— substantia nigra e.g. 
= Parkinson's disease, 

supranutiear gaze palsy, 
multiple system atrophy 
(Striatonigral degeneration). 

Ataxic disorders, Motor neuron disorders, 
predominantly affecting predominantly affecting upper and 
cerebellum e.g, tovrer motor neuron pathwaye.sg. 
spinocerebellar ataxias, motor neuron disease, X-linked 
multiple system atrophy ) spifomuscbulaur altropbhy,a spirnal 
{ofivopontocerebeliar muscular atrophy, hereditary spastic 
atrophy). paraparesis. 

Fig. 9.1: Neurodegenerative diseases classification based on their clinical presentation 
and area of the nervous system affected 

464 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE& DEMYLANATING DISEASES 
TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Dementia is defined as the development of memory impairment and other cognitive deficits 
severe enough to decrease the affected person’s capacity to function at the previous level 
despite a normal level of consciousness. 

Etiology of dementia 
1) Primary i.e. neurodegenerative disease (Idiopathic; genetic defect): commonest cause 

e.g. Alzheimer’s disease. 
2) Secondary: e.g. 

a. Vascular: Multiple cerebral infarcts. 
b. Nutritional, metabolic, Toxins or Drugs e.g. Alcoholism. 
c. Benign tumors, Inflammatory/infective disorders. 

In the management of patients, it is particularly important that reversible causes such 
as obstructive hydrocephalus, vitamin deficiency, hypothyroidism, neurosyphilis and 
HIV encephalitis are excluded. 

|. Alzheimer’s Disease (AD) 
INCIDENCE: 
- AD is the most common cause of dementia in the elderly population. 
- Age is animportant risk factor for AD; the incidence is about 3% in persons 65 to 74 years 

old, 19% in those 75 to 84 years old, and 47% in those older than 84 years. 
- Most cases of AD are sporadic, but at least 5% to 10% are familial with early onset. 
PATHOGENESIS: The crucial event is the accumulation of beta amyloid peptide, or AB, in 
the brain over time, initiating a chain of events that result in AD. 

(1) AB is created when the transmembrane protein amyloid precursor protein (APP) is 
sequentially cleaved by the enzymes B-amyloid converting enzyme (BACE) (Beta 
secretase) and y-secretase. When APP is cleaved by a-secretase and y-secretase, it 
liberates a different peptide that is non- pathogenic. Mutations in APP on chromosome 
21 or in enzymes responsible for its degradation lead to familial AD by increasing the 
rate at which AB is generated. 

(2) These deposits are toxic to the neurons as they affect neurotransmission and finally lead 
to neuronal death. 

(3) The presence of AB also leads to hyper-phosphorylation of the neuronal microtubule 
binding protein tau. This causes tau to redistribute from axons into dendrites and cell 
bodies, where it aggregates into tangles, which also contribute to neuronal dysfunction 
and cell death. 
Amyloid deposits—> glutamate — activates NMDA receptors — ca**influx into 
neurons— cell apoptosis; exocitotoxity. 
Progressive loss of cholinergic nicotinic neurons involved in cognition & memory (will be 
explained in pharma lecture). 

(4) The other major genetic risk factor is a variant of apolipoprotein E called £4 (ApoE4). 
Each ApoE4 allele that is present increases the risk of AD by approximately 4-fold and 
also appears to lower the age of onset. How ApoE4 influences AB accumulation is still 
unknown. 

465



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE& DEMYLANATING DISEASES 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Secretion | Aggregation § Fibrillogenesis 
Rci cSE  fa oon Microglial 

cell 

Reactive 
astrocyte 

Clearance 

A 

Neuroptl 
threads 

Microtubule 

y | Abnormal ¥ 
- phosphorylation 4 

i = = Tau —» —pPHF 

_ % Overactive Hypo-active 
© 7 kinase(s) phosphatase(s) 

B 

Fig. 9.2: Pathogenesis of AD: 
A. This schematic illustrates a hypothetical mechanism for the formation of senile plaques 
(SPs) from soluble AB peptides produced inside celis and secreted into the extracellular space. 
Amyloidogenic Al may encounter fibril-inducing cofactors and go on to form A fibrils to 
deposit in SPs. SPs are surrounded by reactive astrocytes and microglial cells, which secrete 
cytokines that may contribute to the toxicity of the SPs. 
B. This schematic illustrates a hypothetical mechanism leading to the conversion of normal 
tau overlying microtubules into paired helical filaments that are generated in neuronal 
perikarya and their processes leading to formation of neurofibrillary tangles. The death of 
affected neurons would release tau and increase the levels of tau in the CSF of patients with 
AD. 

466 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE& DEMYLANATING DISEASES 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

MORPHOLOGY: 

Gross (Fig.9.3): 
(1) the brain is often reduced in weight. 
(2) Variable degree of cortical atrophy of frontal, temporal and parietal lobes resulting in 

widening of the sulci. 
(3) Compensatory ventricular dilatation in severe cases (hydrocephalus ex vacuo). 

Healthy brain Alzheimer’s disease brain 

Carebral cortex: The cortex shnvels 
Responsible for up, damaging areas 
language and invoitved in thinking, 
information planning and 

embening 

J 
filled with 
geredrospinal 
fuld grony 
larger 

ca Hippocampus: Hippocampus 
d Cntical to the shnnks severely 

formation of new 
memories 

- a! 4 

Fig. 9.3: Gross morphology of Alzheimer disease: 
Upper left: Coronal slice of normal brain for comparison. 
Upper right: Alzheimer’s disease showing generalized cortical atrophy, most marked in the 
medial temporal lobes with enlargement of ventricles. Lower left: Outer surface of the brain 
in healthy individual of matched age and in Alzheimer disease, note the widened sulci. 
Lower right: A diagram summarizing the gross changes in Alzheimer’s disease. 

Microscopic: 
(1) Neuronal loss. 
(2) Gliosis. 
(3) Extracellular neuritic plaques: appearing as focal spherical structures with central 

amyloid core and variable numbers of associated dystrophic neurites, reactive 
astrocytes, and microglia. 

467 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE& DEMYLANATING DISEASES 
TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

(4) Intracellular Neurofibrillary tangles: contain abnormal tau protein and appear as 
perinuclear, curvilinear, flameshaped or globular, pale basophilic profiles in neuronal cell 
bodies on H & E stain. These structures and neuropil threads are much easier to detect 
on silver stains or using IHC antibody against phosphorylated tau. 

(5) One common coexisting neuropathology seen with AD is cerebral amyloid angiopathy 
caused by deposition of AB in the walls of cerebral blood vessels. 

Fig. 9.4: Alzheimer disease. 
Left: Neuritic plaques contain a central core of amyloid and a surrounding region of 

dystrophic neurites (Bielschowsky silver stain). 
Right: Immunohistochemical stain for AP. Peptide is present in the core of the plaques. 

neurafibiiiary 
tangles 

normal brain Alzheimer's brain 

Fig. 9.5 Alzheimer disease: Left: Neurofibrillary tangle. 
Right: diagrammatic illustration of the characteristic microscopic findings in Alzheimer’s 

disease 

468 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & 
DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Demvelinating disorders 

Any disease of the nervous system in which the myelin sheath of neurons is damaged. 
This damage impairs the conduction of signals in the affected nerves. 

Classified into: 
1- Myelinoclastic diseases: Normal and healthy myelin is destroyed by a toxic, chemical 

or autoimmune substance, e.g. multiple sclerosis. 
2- Leukodystrophic diseases (Dysmyelinating diseases): Myelin is abnormal and 

degenerates, e.g. Krabbe disease. 

Clinical picture: 
Ocular paralysis 
Impaired muscle coordination 
Weakness (muscle) 
Loss of sensation 
Impaired vision 
Unsteady gait 
Spastic paraparesis 

Incontinence 

Hearing problems 
Speech problems 

PRIMARY DISEASES OF MYELINE 

Within the CNS, axons are tightly ensheathed by myelin, an electrical insulator that allows 
rapid propagation of neural impulses. 
Myelin consists of multiple layers of highly specialized, closely apposed plasma membranes 
that are assembled by oligodendrocytes. 
Although myelinated axons are present in all areas of the brain, they are the dominant 
component in the white matter; therefore, most diseases of myelin are primarily white 
matter disorders. 
Most diseases of CNS myelin do not involve the peripheral nerves to any significant extent, 
and vice versa. 

In general, diseases involving myelin are separated into two broad groups: 

469



NEURODEGENERATIVE & 
CHAPTER IX: 

DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Demyelinating diseases of the CNS Dysmyelinating diseases 

Multiple sclerosis (MS) and other (leukodystrophy) 

related disorders e.g. Acute » myelin is not formed properly or has 
disseminated encephalomyelitis abnormal turnover kinetics. 
(ADEM) 

» Viral infection of oligodendrocytes, as e associated with mutations that 
in progressive multifocal disrupt the function of proteins that 
leukoencephalopathy (PML) and are required for the formatio 
injury caused by drugs an normal i \S 

Multiple Sclerosis 

MS is an autoimmune demyelinating disorder characterized
 by distinct episodes of 

neurologic deficits, separated in time, attributable to white m
atter lesions that are separated 

in space. 

it is the most common of the demyelinating disorders, having
 a prevalence of 

approximately 1 per 1000 persons in most of the United Stat
es and Europe. 

- The disease may become clinically apparent at any age, alt
hough onset in childhood or 

after age 50 is relatively rare. 

- Women are affected twice as often as men. 

- In most patients with MS, the illness shows relapsing and remitting episodes of 

neurologic impairment. The frequency of relapses tends t
o decrease during the course 

of the illness, but a steady neurologic deterioration
 is characteristic in a subset of 

patients. 

PATHOGENESIS (Fig. 9.8) 
- Autoimmune disease caused by a combination of enviro

nmental and genetic factors that 

result in a loss of tolerance to self-proteins (in this case, mye
lin antigens) 

_ The nature of the initiating agent suggested to be an infec
tious agent, remains uncertain. 

_ Genetic factors related to HLA-DR and genes encoding recep
tors for the cytokines IL-2 and 

IL-7 which are known to control the activation and regulation
 of T cell- mediated immune 

responses. The evidence of genetic factor relation to MS: The
 disease risk is 15-fold higher 

when the disease is present in a first-degree relative, and the concordance rate for 

monozygotic twins is approximately 25%, with a much lower
 rate for dizygotic twins. 

- A central role for CD4+ T cells has been suggested. There
 is also evidence for important 

contributions from CD8+ T cells and B cells. 

470 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & 
DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

- While MS is characterized by the presence of demyelination out of proportion to axonal 
loss, some injury to axons does occur. Toxic effects of lymphocytes, macrophages, and 
their secreted molecules have been implicated in initiating the process of axonal injury, 
sometimes even leading to neuronal death. 

(T helper cells) and CD8+ 
{cytotoxic T cells), recognize myelin as foreign and attack it, initiating a damaging, 

inflammatory response. 
MORPHOLOGY 
Gross: is primarily a white matter disease with affected areas showing multiple, well- 
circumscribed, slightly depressed, glassy-appearing, gray-tan, irregularly shaped lesions 
termed plaques. These commonly arise near the ventricles. They also are frequent in the optic 
nerves and chiasm, brain stem, ascending and descending fiber tracts, cerebellum, and spinal 
cord. 

Microscopic: 
- The lesions have sharply defined borders at the microscopic level. 
- In an active plaque there is evidence of ongoing myelin breakdown with abundant 

macrophages containing myelin debris. Lymphocytes and macrophages are present, 
mostly as perivascular cuffs. 

- Small active lesions often are centered on small veins. 
- Axons are relatively preserved but may be reduced in number. 

471 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & 

DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 
TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

CLINICAL FEATURES 
- The course of MS is variable, but commonly 

there are multiple relapses followed by 
episodes of remission; typically, recovery 
during remissions is not complete. 

- As a consequence, over time there is usually a 
gradual, often stepwise, accumulation of 
neurologic deficits. 

- Imaging studies with MRI brain are mandatory. 
- The CSF in patients with MS shows a mildly 

elevated protein level with an increased 
proportion of immunoglobulin. When the 
immunoglobulin is examined further, 
oligoclonal bands usually are identified. 
Although B cells are clearly involved in the 
pathogenesis of MS, the contribution of EEE sr ES. op : 
these characteristic antibodies to the | Fig. 9.7: Morphologic features of MS: 
disease process is unknown. Upper, Section of fresh brain showing a 

plaque around occipital horn of the lateral 

ventricle. Lower, Unstained regions of 

demyelination (MS plaques) around the 

fourth ventricle. Luxol fast blue-periodic 

acid-Schiff stain for myelin. 

Main symptoms of 
Multiple sclerosis 

Coton Vissi fro 
impairment « Op iy & I «TH 

Dysarthria| 

“Woskness 1  

Hypoesthesias 

Fig. 9.8: Main symptoms of MS Urinary: 

472 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & 
DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

DRUG THERAPY OF NEURODEGENERATIVE AND MYELINE DISEASE 
ALZHEIMER'’S DISEASE (AD) 
e [tis the most common cause of dementia in the elderly. 
e It is a neurodegenerative disorder characterized by impairment of memory & cognitive 

function together with behavioral changes (psychosis, depression). 
e [t may lead to a completely vegetative state and early death. 
e Dementia is defined impairment of cognitive functions including memory in a fully 

conscious patient, severe enough to interfere with daily activity. 
Pathophysiology of AD 
1) Accumulation of senile plaques (-amyloid accumulations), and formation of numerous 

neurofibrillary tangles. 
2) “cholinergic hypothesis” loss of cortical neurans, particularly cholinergic neurons (J{,Ach). 
3) Sustained activation of glutamate I> NMDA-receptors = 1° excessive Ca influx = 

Excitotoxicity = Neuronal Dysfunction and cell death or apoptosis. 
Aim of therapy in AD 
4) improve cholinergic transmission within the CNS by using cholinomimetics (to 1 Ach) 
5) Prevent excitotoxic actions resulting from overstimulation of NMDA-glutamate receptors 

by using NMDA receptor antagonist in selected areas of the brain (Block NMDA-R). 

N.B.: Pharmacologic intervention for Alzheimer’s disease is only palliative and provides 
modest short-term benefit. None of the available therapeutic agents alter the underlying 
neurodegenerative process. 
Fig (9.9) Pathophysiology of AD 

Alzheimer & gisanse ; oe : 
la mssncinied with . 1 " 

neuronal death resulting Acetylcholine  whadigibi td : | lend lo escessiwe calcium 
In duced production Pathway Pathway influx neuronal dysiunclion 

od acetvichotine” and cell dsatn™® 

-_o  dg “Land's Ne % Fs 

Donepezil HCI NAMENDA XR 
[vreipae 2a! MET de ont ALLE FAME PGA RET ow DelivO 
P25 ylbal  ta hsiI s h|t  tu 18 hilock susinined 

stow Ee Bresktowi sciavalinonf  NMDA 
of atagtylotiabien Li receplors cule by 

reallly | ARE EU) ET le RL 

FETNY 

SY PAP TIM PROGRESSION 

Management of AD 
1. Cholinesterase inhibitors%1: 

e Donepezil (long ti2 = 70h, once daily tablets) 
e Rivastigmine (short ti; = 1-2 h%?— transdermal patch and twice daily capsules) 

® Tacrine was the first FDA approved for AD but NOT used, due to hepatotoxicity. 

- galantamine, NMDA-blocker FDA approved for AD & stimulates presynaptic nicotinic receptors (‘I Ach release). 

62 *‘pseudo-irreversible’ inhibitor of acetylcholinesterase & butyrylcholinesterase. Its t., very short (1-2 h), but 
the duration of action is longer as the enzymes are blocked for around 8.5 and 3.5 h, respectively. 

473 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & 

DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Mechanism of action and properties: 
e P Cholinergic transmission in brain by inhibiting acetylcholinesterase (AchE). 
e Orally active, Cross BBB; some selectivity to AchE centrally compared to periphery. 
e Improve cognitive function but do not delay progress of disease. 

Uses: 
1. Mild to moderate cases of Alzheimer disease (AD). 
2. Moderate to severe cases of AD. 
3. Dementia of parkinsonism (only rivastigmine) 

Side effects®®: 
1. Cholinomimetic effects: anorexia, nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, Abdominal cramps, 

myalgia & muscle cramps, bradycardia, tremors, etc.... 
2. Drug interactions involving CYP 45Q (except rivastigmine)®. 

2. NMDA receptor Antagonists: 
Memantine (long t1/2 = 70h, once daily tablets) 
Mechanism of action: 
e Noncompetitive antagonist of (NMDA) receptors— limiting influx of ca®* into neurons 
— protects neurons from glutamate induced excitotoxicity®®. 

Uses: * Moderate to severe cases. 
Side effects: (well tolerated & less toxic than cholinomimetics) 

1. Confusion, dizziness, headache, Agitation, hallucination. 
2. Constipation. 

N.B.: Namzaric (combination of memantine ER + donepezil ) FDA approved at 2014 for 
moderate to severe dementia of AD (oral capsule once daily). 
3. Other agents (unlabeled use) 

e Cholesterol-lowering agents: Statins, NSAIDs & Antioxidants (vitamin E & omega-3 fatty 
acids (limited value). 

e¢ Monoclonal antibody targeting the AB e.g. Bapineuzumab (under research®®) 
Antidepressants (SSRIs > TCAs) and Antipsychotics SGA e.g. Aripiprazole, Olanzapine, 
Risperidone are used for treatment of depression and psychotic symptoms in AD. 

63 Side effects reduced by: gradual titration over > 3 months - transdermal rivastigmine. 

64 Donepezil & galantamine are metabolized by CYP2D6 &3A4. But, Rivastigmine is hydrolyzed by esterases in 
liver and intestine 
65 it also blocks SHT3 and nicotinic receptors (unknown role in dementia). 
66 y and B-Secretase inhibitors and a- secretase enhancers are also under research 

474 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & 
DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Drugs therapy of Multiple Sclerosis 

Multiple sclerosis is an autoimmune inflammatory demyelinating disease of the CNS. 
The course of MS is variable. It is usually chronic, relapsing, or progressive disease that may 
span 10 to 20 years. 

Normal Nerve 

Central Nervous 
System (Brain and 

Spinal Cord) 

Damaged Myelin Sheath 
due to Multiples Sclerosis 

210110 AFP 

Fig. 9.10 A, B: Pathogenesis of multiple sclerosis 

* There are four common syndromes of symptoms that reflect the parts of the CNS 
affected: spinal cord, brainstem, cerebral and cerebellar syndromes. 

Management of MS 

l Treatment of Acute Episode (Exacebations): Corticosteroids 
Il. Disease Modifying Drugs (DMDs) 
Il. Symptomatic Treatment 

Many drugs are used to manage symptoms of MS such as spasticity, constipation, bladder 
dysfunction, and depression. 

Fampridine, an oral potassium channel blocker, improves walking speeds in patients with 
MS. It is FDA approved for this use. 

475 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & 

DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Without Fampridine Sh <M 
- = > - La) ad wo?” 

. v i
w = A: 

- . E 
- gr - ho [ 

5 oa 

& 5 ypF Y = 
[3 - wv Fo) 27 a AA 

» - bs ' 

Wath Faoampriichnoe 

ne "- 
oo Comm = 
a = 

Fig.(9.11): Mechanism of action of Fampridine 

Treatment of Acute Exacerbations: 
Corticosteroids : 
methylprednisolone 0.5-1 g/d IV for 5 days followed by tapered oral prednisone 
Adverse effect Euphoria 
A. Catabolic effect: {in chronic use) Tapa 

- on Carbohydrate: hyperglycemia (DM) 4 [oN Bernie 
- on Fat: lipolysis - redistributes fat from hes 
extremities to face, abdomen & shoulders  8ufiaio num a0 UN (Cauracts 

- on Protein : A | Moontece, with red 
e Muscle wasting: thin arms & legs. Rapes | AV i \ Pane) cess 
« Thinning of skin. EL increased 
e Retardation of growth (children). Tey ANNs] Tomas 
» Osteoporosis (\, protein & Ca2+). 5) A (Avascutar necrosis 

B. Salt and water retension: Vins es S$] derma 
o Edema. muscia wasting #7 Easy bring 

o 1 weight. § 
o Hypertension. i 

C. Behavioral changes: Psychosis- Depression. { iba 
D. Others: Peptic ulcer, Susceptibility to & 

infection, poor wound healing, Hirshutism. hy 

Fig. 9.12: 

Adverse effects of corticosteroids 
Disease-modifying drugs {DMDs 
Drugs currently approved for MS are indicated 
to decrease relapse rates or in some cases to prevent accumulation of disability. 

476 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & 
DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

The major target of these medications is to modify the immune response through 
inhibition of white blood cell-mediated inflammatory processes that eventually lead to 
myelin sheath damage and decreased axonal communication between cells. 
1. Interferon Bla and interferon B1b: “Parenteral” 

~- Intramuscular or subcutaneous injection. (Weekly or every other day) 
- Itis a first line therapy. 
- The immunomodulatory effects of interferon help to diminish the inflammatory 
responses that lead to demyelination of the axon sheaths. 

Adverse effects: 
a. Flu-like symptoms. 
b. Depression. 
¢. Local injection site reactions. 
d. Hepatic enzyme increases (ALT, AST). 

2. Fingolimod: “Oral daily” 
- It is the first oral DMDs approved from FDA. 
- It binds and blocks S1P; receptors and alters lymphocyte migration, resulting in 
fewer lymphocytes in the CNS and “T-cell Sequestration in the lymph nodes” (Fig. 
9.15) 

Adverse effects: 
a. First-dose bradycardia (used with caution in cardiac patients). 
b. Increased risk of infection. 
¢. Macular edema {used with caution in DM). 

Fingofmod J Enhanced 
SIP endothelium barrier 

receplors 
L- 

T cells 

ley Ey 
i 

Lymph node 

Fig. 9.13: Mechanism of action of Fingolimod 

3. Natalizumab: “IV infusion, Monthly” 
It is a monoclonal antibody against “a4B1-integrin” — J, BBB invasion by T-cells. 
It is indicated for Progressive MS in patients who have failed first line therapies. 

477 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & 

DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Fig. 9.14: Mechanism of action of Natalizumab 
Adverse Effects 
1. Allergic Reactions: So, need slow (2 h) infusion & give H 1 &2 blockers... 
2. Anti-natalizumab antibodies: (9% - 12%). 
3. Progressive multifocal leukoencephalopathy (PML). “1/ 1000” 
Serious rare, JC virus®’-> rapid progressive inflammation and damage of white matter = 
deterioration of the neurological symptoms up to permanent disability or death. 

So, need specific recommendations: 
1. Test for JC virus, 
2. Avoid in immunocompromised patients 
3. Use Alone for 24 months (maximum duration only ) 
4. Carefully Monitor the patient. 

4. Chemotherapeutic agents, (e.g. cyclophosphamide & azathioprine) have also been 
used. 

&> Progressive Multifocal 
Leuxgencephaiopathy 

(PML) 

JC virus infection 
of oligodendrocytes 

Myriad of } 
presenting symptoms 
-Ataxla 
- Visual disturbance 
- Encephalopathy 

Rapidly fatalif 
uh 

Fig (9.15): Pathogenesis of PML 

7]t is latent in the kidneys and lymphoid organs of healthy individuals, and its reactivation in the context of 
immunosuppression 

478



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & 
DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Drugs Used In Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis 

- Amyotrophic Lateral Sclerosis (ALS) is characterized by progressive degeneration of motor 
neurons, resulting in the inability to initiate or control muscle movement. 

- ALS, also known aslou Gehrig's disease, is a specific disease that causes the 
death of neurons and is considered the most common "motor neuron disease”. 

The clinical picture of ALS: 
Muscle fasciculation, hypotonia, muscle wasting, paradoxical reflexes stiff muscles, muscle 
twitching, and gradually worsening weakness due to muscles decreasing in size. This results 
in difficulty in speaking, swallowing, and eventually breathing. 
The cause of ALS: Giotto fy Gluamats Regulation 
It is not known in 90% to 95% of cases. : 
About 5-10% of cases are inherited from a . x 
person's parents. 
Pathophysiology: The neurons of sufferers of 
ALS accumulate glutamate, which may be the == 
cause of the paralysis. : 

paraly Fo 
e FP 

Riluzol  A = WoForme 
It first FDA (1995) approved drug for the Gutman pr JP po pry 
management of ALS®S. Fig.9.16: Pathophysiology of ALS 
Mechanism of action®9: 
It inhibits glutamate release via blocking presynaptic sodium channels (main mechanism). 
Riluzole may improve survival time and delay the need for ventilator support in patients 
suffering from ALS. 

ni 

Na* 

Riluzole 

Glutamate 

NMDAR 

| Postsynaptic ] 

| neuron 

Fig. 9.17 Mechanism of action of Riluzole 

°% Edaravone is a free radical scavenger (antioxidant). FDA Approved for ALS at 2017. 

-Tiglutik {thickened riluzole) thickened liquid form of riluzole, FDA approved in Sep. 2018. to avoid potential problems of 

crushing tablets. Exservan™ (riluzole oral film) FDA approved in Nov. 2019 

- RELYVRIO, a combination of sodium phenylbutyrate and taurursodiol, was FDA approved to ALS in 2022. 

Qalsody (tofersen), treat ALS associated with a mutation in the superoxide dismutase 1 (SOD1) gene. FDA approved in 

2023. 

63 May also has some NMDA receptor antagonistic activity. 

479 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & 

DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

CNS Trauma 

Traumatic head injuries Spinal Cord Trauma 

Sh i | - 
da a | | i | 

- Paraplegia: 
Traumatic Thoracic segments 

Parenctymal Vascular Injury Associated with 5 
Injuries | : - Quadriplegia: 

(Hematoma) displacement of ical 
spinal column Cervical segments 

C3-C5: Respiratory 
compromise 

Traumatic Head Injuries 

I- Parenchymal injuries 
Il- Traumatic Vascular injury (Hemorrhage /Hematoma) 

¢ Epidural (Extradural) hematoma: (See Table 9.1) 
e Subdural hematoma: See table.... 

Traumatic intracerebral and traumatic sutialocioid hemorrhages: On trauma to 
the CNS, the parenchymal vessels of the hemispheres may get torn. 

Table 9.1: Epidural and subdural hematoma 
Epidural Hematoma Subdural Hematoma 

Between the dura and the 
Location between the skull and dura 

arachnoid 

Tear of bridging veins drain the 
Most commonly rupture of middie brain to dural sinuses 
meningeal artery, often secondary Risk factors: 

to temporoparietal fracture Brain atrophy (elderly) 
e Anticoagulant therapy 
e Shaking, whiplash 

Epidural Hemaloma Duper 
grid sing Subdury Homatama 

tigily exening  exaardey 
involved vessels wit prmin Beed | mm zeargeh Hwy

ih yeas TIS 
—— 7 

Epidural Hematoma 
4] 

Subdural Hematoma 

480



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & 
DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Lucid interval before loss of 
} ‘ slow venous bleeding with 

consciousness; "talk and die & 
delayed onset of gradually 

toms syndrome" : 
Symp 4 : - increasing headache and 

Trans-tentorial herniation may 
confusion. 

occur. 

Crescent-shaped hemorrhage 
Biconvex-shaped hemorrhage that that crosses suture lines. 

does not cross suture lines. Gyri are preserved since pressure 
is distributed equally. 

e Cannot cross falx tentorium. 

Head CT 
appearance 

Radiograph: Epidural hematoma (left) and subdural hematoma (right) 

CERBROVASCULAR DISEASES 

Hypoxia, Ischemia, 
Cerebral edema 

Infarction 

Spontaneous 
; Cerebral Aneurysm 

(nontraumatic) brain 
: and vascular 
intraparenchymal ; 

malformations 
hemorrhages 

481 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & 

DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Cerebral Edema 

Definition: Cerebral edema is the accumulation of excess fluid within the brain parenchyma. 

Pathogenesis: There are two underlying mechanisms for the development of cerebral edema 

that often occur together particularly when there is generalized injury. 

Vasogenic edema Cytotoxic edema 

« Occurs when the integrity of An increase in intracellular 
the normal blood-brain barrier fluid secondary to neuronal 
is disrupted with subsequent and glial cell membrane injury. 
increase in the vascular . e.g. generalized 

permeability. hypoxic/ischemic insult or with 
» Can be either localized exposure to some toxins. 
adjacent to inflammation or 
tumors or generaliz 

Gross: 
» The edematous brain is softer than 

normal and often appears to "overfill" 
the cranial vault. 

» In generalized edema the gyri are 
flattened as a result of compression of 
the expanding brain by the dura 
mater and inner surface of the skull, 
the intervening sulci are narrowed, 
and the ventricular cavities are compressed (Fig. 9.18). 

Fig.9.18: Cerebral edema 

Hypoxia- Ischemia- Infarction 

General concepts: 
¢ The brain may be deprived of oxygen by two general mechanisms: 

- Functional hypoxia, caused by a low partial pressure of oxygen (e.g., high altitude), 

impaired oxygen-carrying capacity (e.g., severe anemia, carbon monoxide poisoning), 

or inhibition of oxygen use by tissue (e.g., cyanide poisoning). 

- Ischemia due to tissue hypoperfusion, which can be caused by hypotension, vascular 

obstruction, or both. 
e Transient ischemic attack (TIA) is due to small platelet thrombi or atheroemboli and is 

characteristically reversible, with symptoms lasting less <24 hours. 

eo Stroke is the clinical term for acute-onset neurologic deficits resulting from hemorrhagic 

or obstructive vascular lesions. Stroke can be due to infarction (85% of all stroke cases) or 

hemorrhage (15% of all stroke cases). 

482



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & 
DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

eo Multi-infarct Dementia: Cerebral atherosclerosis Presents as a slow, stepwise, decrease in 
mental function Important to distinguish from Alzheimer and other causes of dementia 

Patterns of Ischemia: Global (diffuse ischemic encephalopathy) or Focal: 
A- Global Cerebral ischemia 

Cause: Widespread ischemic-hypoxic injury can occur in the setting of severe systemic 
hypotension, usually when systolic pressures fall below 50 mm Hg, as in cardiac arrest, 
shock, and severe hypotension. 

B- Focal Cerebral Ischemia 

Cerebral arterial occlusion leads first to focal ischemia and then to infarction in the 
distribution of the compromised vessel. The size, location, and shape of the infarct and 
the extent of tissue damage that results may be modified by collateral blood flow. 

» Arterial occlusion: occlusion of the cerebral arteries by either thrombi or emboli is the 
most common cause of cerebral infarction. 

Thrombotic occlusion of the carotid or cerebral arteries is most frequently the result 
of atherosclerosis, and rarely, from arteritis of the cranial arteries. 
Embolic arterial occlusion is commonly derived from the heart, most often from mural 
thrombosis complicating myocardial infarction, from atrial fibrillation and 
endocarditis. 
Lacunar Infarcts are small infarcts in deep non-cortical white matter or the brainstem 
that result from the occlusion of penetrating branches of cerebral arteries. The term 
“lacune” refers to the crescent- or moon-shaped tiny stroke that results from 
occlusion of these vessels. Cerebral small vessel disease is most commonly related to 
aging and hypertension. 

» Venous occlusion: Venous infarction in the brain is an infrequent phenomenon due to 
good communications of the cerebral venous drainage. However, 

» in cancer, due to increased predisposition to thrombosis, superior sagittal thrombosis 
may occur leading to bilateral, parasagittal, multiple haemorrhagic infarcts. 

» Non-occlusive causes: Compression of the cerebral arteries from outside such as occurs 
during herniation may cause cerebral infarction. Mechanism of watershed (border zone) 
cerebral infarction in hypoxic encephalopathy has already been explained above. 

483 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & 

DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Morphology of cerebral infarction: 

Table 9.2 Gross and microscopic changes associated with cerebral infarction 

Time Gross Changes Microscopic Changes 

0-12 | Nochanges | Minimalornochanges - : 

12-24 | Minimal changes | Red (hypereosinophilic) neurons with pyknotic nuctei 

24-48 | Indistinctgray-white | Neutrophilicinfiltration 

fi Ra Ft a Ci Pe fo el ges 
[= Lak, ERI val” ®) 5% ar RET Tr TV 

eea  p pee JU SE 

Note: Hemorrhagic infarct leads to erythrocyte degradation and hemosiderin deposition. 

4 

- . ® 

Tn ¢ : v 
: 

SI 

: a bh JAE 
® 

LA f yy, 
®t | 

5 % Ao 
> . | 

~ ££ @ 

a 1 - 

» WB 

a 1 J 

! WN Rr 
bid : \ n A 

’ 4 ' a. 

Fig. 9.19: Left;A remote, cavitated infarction in the territory of the MCA exhibits the 
typical irregular, "ratty" edge of an old infarct and a very large cavitated hole, 

Right; Red dead neurons in early infarction. 

AR4



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & 
DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Intracranial Non-traumatic (Spontaneous) Hemorrhage 

Intraparenchymal hemorrhages are associated with (1) hypertension and other diseases 
leading to vascular wall injury e.g. cerebral amyloid angiopathy (2) structural lesions such 
as arteriovenous and cavernous malformations, and (3) tumors. 
Subarachnoid hemorrhages Spontaneous subarachnoid hemorrhage is usually caused by a 
structural vascular abnormality, commonly aneurysm but also occur with arteriovenous 
malformation (AVM). 

Note: Subdural or epidural hemorrhages usually are associated with trauma. 

pr — = 

| Int-acerobrail Subaractino 

% d : A & IF LJ 1 4 3 BR big 

y FY 4 Fr 
Nl i ¥ he a f FF ] 

3 F] 3 So. | Wh } 

: 2 L | 

( iy | 
gy 0 

r KE = I - 
Fe iat . 

: . ¥ a. . i r= 

. & 1 3! bl # H | i | ¥ 
he i] F | bl " 

a 4 . ] J) r - ent A SF " 

Ey =; 

. | HT : al 

Fig. 9.20: Intracranial Non-traumatic Hemorrhage: left; intraparenchymal hemorrhage 
represented by intracerebral hematoma, right; subarachnoid hemorrhage 

1. Congenital (Berry Aneurysm): 
» Affecting the blood vessels around circle of Willis (Fig. 9.20). 
» Usually multiple saccular aneurysms and if they rupture, they cause subarachnoid 

hemorrhage. 
» Although referred to as congenital, they are not present at birth and develop over 

time. 
» Associated conditions: Polycystic kidney disease (autosomal dominant). 
Aetiology: 
e Congenital defects of the media at the arterial bifurcations. 
eo Focal destruction of the internal elastic membrane resulting from hemodynamic 

alterations. 
eo Abnormalities in specific collagen subsets. 

2. Mycotic: 
» Due to subacute bacterial endocarditis or polyarteritis nodosa. 
» It occurs when the wall of an artery is weakened by mild infection. 
» Commonest site is branches of middle cerebral artery. 

3. Atherosclerotic: 
» |t occurs due to cerebral atherosclerosis. 
» tis fusiform in shape. 

485 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & 

DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

» Sites: Internal carotid and basilar arteries. 
4. Charcot-Bouchard Microaneurysms: 

» Hypertension causes hyaline arteriolar sclerosis of the deep penetrating arteries and 
arterioles that supply the basal ganglia, the hemispheric white matter, and the brain 
stem. Affected arteriolar walls are weakened and are more vulnerable to rupture (slit 
hemorrhage). 

» In some instances, minute aneurysms form in vessels less than 300 um in diameter 
called Charcot-Bouchard microaneurysms. 

Effects of Cerebral Aneurysms: 
1. Increased intracranial tension. 
2. Rupture with subsequent hemorrhage. 
3. Hydrocephalus. 
4. Thrombosis and calcification. 

Vascular Malformation 

A. Arteriovenous malformation ((AVM)Fig. 9.21) 
e AVM is admixture of arteries, veins and intermediate-sized vessels. 

eo Accounts for 1.5-4% of all brain masses. 
¢ Common in males between 10-30 years. 
eo Middle cerebral artery distribution is the most common site. 

B. Cavernous malformation (Cavernous angioma) 
e Large, sinusoidal-type vessels. 
e Slight male predominance, most in young adults. 

C. Capillary telangiectasia 
eo (Capillary-sized vessels separated by normal neural parenchyma. 

3 i 

~~ 

Fig. 9.22: Cerebral berry aneurysm at base of Fig. 9.21: AVM with compact tangle of abnormal 

the brain arteries and veins 

486 

a 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE & DEMYLINATING DISEASES, 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

CNS Tumors {WHO Classification) 

i~ D iffuse astrocytic and Choroid plexus tumors 
oligodendroglial tumours Ependymal tumors (papilloma, atypical 
& (Difiuss gliomas) : papilloma, carcinoma) 

2! Neuronal and mixed 
a tumours | x A Tu mours of the ncradni al and 
o B Central neurocytoma | Embryonalmmon paraspinal nerves 

Gangliogliomas - | 

Lymphomas and Histiocytic 
tumours 

Meningiomas Germ cell tumors 

Metastatic tumors 

487 



I = oy ———— Ee 
EU: 

CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE& DEMYLANATING DISEASES 

TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

CNS Tumors 

- Tumors of the central nervous system (CNS) can be broadly grouped into two major 
categories: primary tumors and secondary (metastatic) tumors. Primary CNS tumors are 
the second commonest form of cancer in infants and children under the age of 15 years, 
exceeded in frequency only by leukemia. 

- The CNS tumors can also be grouped according to location and their corresponding 
incidence by age. In adults, approximately 70% of all brain tumors occur supratentorially 
(i.e., within the cerebral hemispheres or coverings); these include, in order of frequency, 
metastases followed by gliomas, meningiomas, and schwannomas. In children, 
approximately 70% of brain tumors occur infratentorially (i.e., within the cerebellum or 
brainstem) and are neuroepithelial in origin, the most common being pilocytic astrocytoma, 
medulloblastoma, and ependymoma in decreasing order of frequency. Spinal cord tumors 
constitute about 15% of all primary CNS tumors and include schwannomas, meningiomas, 
and gliomas (ependymoma, astrocytoma) in decreasing order of frequency. 

Traditionally, the classification of nervous system tumors has relied on the histological 
appearance of a particular neoplasm supplemented by immunohistochemical features; 
however, tumor classification and patient management are increasingly dependent on the 
evaluation and incorporation of molecular and genetic information. The classification 
widely used for CNS tumors is based on the World Health Organization (WHO) 
Classification of Tumors of the Central Nervous System. 

Gliomas include Diffuse astrocytic and oligodendroglial tumors (Diffuse gliomas), Other 
(localized) astrocytic tumors e.g. pilocytic astrocytoma, and ependymal tumors. 

The term neuroepithelial tumors include gliomas, choroid plexus tumors, neuronal and 
mixed neuronal glial tumors, embryonal tumors, and tumors of pineal region. 

The brain tumors are assigned into one of four grades (1 to 4) according to the WHO 
system of CNS classification. Yet, the anatomic site of the neoplasm can influence outcome 
independent of histologic classification due to local effects {e.g., a benign meningioma may 
cause cardiorespiratory arrest from compression of the medulla) or non-resectability {(e.g., 
brain stem gliomas). 

Metastatic spread of brain tumors to other regions of the body is extremely rare, but the 
brain is not comparably protected against spread of distant tumors mainly carcinomas. 

Radiologic examination of brain tumors is an indispensable part of the assessment with 
expert evaluation of the exact site, size, relation to anatomic structures and possible 
extensions, morphology as solid/ cystic, associated edema and mass effect, and 
enhancement pattern following radioactive material administration. 

488 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE&DEMYLANTING DISEASES 

DISEASES TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

|- Diffuse Gliomas 
Diffuse gliomas are characterized by diffuse infiltration of normal brain tissue by tumor 
cells beyond the tumor core in distinction to other types of neuroepithelial neoplasms that 
are more circumscribed (e.g., ependymoma, pilocytic astrocytoma). Complete surgical 
resection of diffuse gliomas is consequently not possible in most circumstance. 
Diffuse gliomas are associated with a variety of acquired mutations, which cluster in several 
important pathways. Mutations that alter the enzymatic activity of two isoforms of the 
metabolic enzyme isocitrate dehydrogenase (IDH1 and IDH2) are common in diffuse 
glioma. As a result, immunostaining for the mutated form of IDH1 has become an 
important diagnostic and prognostic tool. 

oligodendroglial tumors | | Diffuse astrocytic tumors 

A. Diffuse Astrocytic Tumors 

- Diffuse astrocytic tumors account for about 80% of adult gliomas. 
- They are most frequent in the fourth through the sixth decades of life. 
- They are usually found in the cerebral hemispheres. 
- The most common presenting signs and symptoms are seizures, headaches, and 

focal neurologic deficits related to the anatomic site of involvement. 
They show a spectrum of histologic differentiation that correlates well with clinical 
course and outcome. On the basis of histologic features, they are stratified into three 
groups with increasingly grim prognosis as the grade increases: 
- Diffuse astrocytoma, WHO Grade 2. 
- Astrocytoma, WHO Grade 3. 
- and astrocytoma/glioblastoma 4. 

Prognosis: Diffuse astrocytomas can be static for several years, but at some point, they 
progress; the mean survival is more than 5 years. Eventually, patients suffer rapid 
clinical deterioration that is correlated with the appearance of anaplastic features and 
more rapid tumor growth with progression to anaplastic astrocytoma and astrocytoma 
grade 4. Other patients present with glioblastoma from the start (primary ' 
glioblastoma). Once the histologic features of glioblastoma appear, the prognosis is 
very poor; with treatment (resection, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy), the median 
survival is only 15 months. 

Gross: (Fig. 9.24) Diffuse astrocytomas are poorly defined, gray, infiltrative tumors that 
expand and distort the invaded brain without forming a discrete mass. Infiltration 
beyond the grossly evident margins is always present. The cut surface of the tumor is 
either firm or soft and gelatinous; cystic degeneration may be seen. 
In astrocytoma grade 4/glioblastoma, variation in the gross appearance of the tumor 
from region to region is characteristic. Some areas are firm and white, others are soft 
and yellow (the result of tissue necrosis), and still others show regions of cystic 
degeneration and hemorrhage. 

489



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE&DEMYLANTING DISEASES 

DISEASES TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Fig. 9.23: Gross and radiology of diffuse astrocytic tumors: Left; Large diffuse astrocytoma 
occupying the left temporal lobe. Note the homogeneous surface and the enlargement of 
local anatomical structures. Middle; glioblastoma of the left frontal lobe with typical 
coloration: whitish-grey tumor tissue in the periphery, yellow areas of necrosis, and 
extensive hemorrhage. Note the extension through the corpus callosum into the right 
hemisphere. Right; Postcontrast MRI of glioblastoma showing irregular rim-enhancing mass 
in the frontal lobe. 

Microscopic: Diffuse astrocytomas are characterized by a mild to moderate increase 
in the number of glial cell nuclei, somewhat variable nuclear pleomorphism, and an 
intervening feltwork of fine, glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP)-positive astrocytic cell 
processes that give the background a fibrillary appearance. The tumor cells can be seen 
infiltrating normal tissue many centimeters from the main lesion. Astrocytomas grade 
3 show regions that are more densely cellular and have greater nuclear pleomorphism; 
mitotic figures are present. Astrocytoma/Glioblastoma grade 4 has a histologic 
appearance similar to that of astrocytoma grade 3, as well as either necrosis (often with 
pseudopalisading) or vascular proliferation. (Table 9.3, Fig. 9.24) 

Table 9.3: WHO grading system for Diffuse astrocytic tumors. 

WHO Grade | Designation Histologic criteria 
2 Diffuse astrocytoma No appreciable mitotic activity 
3 Astrocytoma Mitoses 

4 Astrocytoma/Glioblastoma | Necrosis AND/OR Microvascular proliferation 
usually associated with frequent mitoses 

490 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE&DEMYLANTING DISEASES 

DISEASES TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Fig. 9.24: Microscopic features of diffuse astrocytic tumors: Upper left; Diffuse astrocytoma, 
low cellularity and nuclear atypia. Upper right; Anaplastic astrocytoma, hyperceliularity and 
hyperchromatic, irregular nuclei appearing within a fibrillary background and two mitotic 
figures are present. Lower left: Glioblastoma with microvascular proliferation. Lower right: 
Glioblastoma with palisading necrosis. 

B. Oligodendrogliomas 
-— Oligodendrogliomas account for 5% to 15% of gliomas. 

Mostly in the fourth and fifth decades of life. 
Patients may have had several years of antecedent neurologic compiaints, often 
including seizures. 
Mostly in the cerebral hemispheres, mainly in the frontal or temporal lobes. 
Oligodendrogliomas have a better prognosis than that of diffuse astrocytic tumors 
of similar grade. 
The hallmark genetic finding in oligodendrogliomas is codeletion of chromosomes 
1p and 19q, Tumors. 

Microscopic: 
- Oligodendroglioma, WHQ grade 2: the tumor 

is composed of sheets of regular cells with 
rounded nuclei containing finely granular 
chromatin surrounded by a clear halo of 
cytoplasm (Fig. 9.26). The tumor typically 
contains a delicate network of anastomosing 
capillaries. Calcification is common in these 
tumors. Mitotic activity is low. 

- Anaplastic oligodendroglioma, WHO grade 3: 
is a more aggressive with higher cell density, Fig. 9.25: Oligodendroglioma: 

nuclear anaplasia, and prominent mitotic activity. Uniformly rounded nuclei and 

Microvascular proliferation is usually prominent. perinuclear halos imparting 
Anaplastic oligodendrogliomas may contain “fried-egg” patter. 
Necrosis. 

491 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE&DEMYLANTING DISEASES 

DISEASES TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

II- Other (localized) astrocytic tumors e.g. pilocytic astrocytoma 
Pilocytic Astrocytoma, WHO Grade 1: 
- Pilocytic astrocytomas typically affecting children and young adults. 
- Most commonly located in the cerebellum, they also may involve the third ventricle, 

the optic pathways, spinal cord, and occasionally the cerebral hemispheres. 
- The dominant genetic alterations of pilocytic astrocytoma result in the activation of the 

mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway and include activating alterations of 
BRAF and inactivation of neurofibromatosis type 1 (NF1). Mutations in IDH1 and IDH2 
(common in diffuse astrocytomas) are not found in pilocytic tumors. These genetic 
distinctions support the division of these astrocytic neoplasms into distinct diagnostic 
categories. 

- Gross: A pilocytic astrocytoma often is cystic, with a mural nodule in the wall of the 
¢ cyst; if solid, it is usually well circumscribed (Fig. 9.26). 

- Microscopic: This astrocytic tumor of low to moderate cellularity often has a biphasic 
. pattern, with varying proportions of compacted bipolar cells with Rosenthal fibers and 

loose-textured multipolar cells with microcysts. Eosinophilic granular bodies are more 
often encountered in the loose regions. Necrosis and mitoses are rare (Fig. 9.27). 

Fig. 9.26: Pilocytic astrocytoma: Left: Large, partially — sloeylie astrocytoma of the 
cerebellum with a typical mural nodule. Right: A Typical biphasic pattern with alternating 

compact and loose architectural patterns. 

Fig. 9.27: Pilocytic astrocytoma: |L eft: Abundanrt p ram bodies (EGBs). Right: 
Rosenthal fibers. 

lil- Ependymal tumors e.g. Ependymoma 
Ependymoma: 
- Ependymomas is a circumscribed glioma that most often arise next to the ependyma 

lined ventricular system, including the central canal of the spinal cord. 
- Inthe first 2 decades of life, they typically occur near the fourth ventricle and constitute 
5% to 10% of the primary brain tumors in this age group. In adults, the spinal card is 
their most common location; tumors in this site are particularly frequent in the setting 
of neurofibromatosis type 2. 

492 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE&DEMYLANTING DISEASES 
DISEASES TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

-Gross: Ependymomas are well-circumscribed tumors usually arising in or near the 
ventricular system. They are soft and spongy, occasionally with calcium deposits. 
Tumors arising in the fourth ventricle often flow through the foramina of Luschka and 
Magendie. 

- Microscopic: A circumscribed glioma composed of uniform small cells with round to 
oval nuclei with granular chromatin in a fibrillary matrix and characterized by 
perivascular anucleate zones (pseudo-rosettes) with ependymal rosettes also found in 
about one quarter of cases. Classic ependymoma generally has a low cell density and a 
low mitotic count. It very rarely invades adjacent CNS parenchyma to any significant 
extent (Fig. 9.28). Anaplastic ependymomas show increased cell density, high mitotic 
rates, necrosis, and less evident ependymal differentiation. Traditionally, classic 
ependymoma are graded histologically to WHO §rades 2 and 3. 

- However, no association between grade 
and biological behavior or survival has 
been definitively established in 
ependymomas. Given that specific 
genetic alterations and molecular groups 
have recently been proposed as | 
prognostic or predictive factors for these 
tumors, the practice of histologically i: 
grading ependymoma may soon become 
obsolete altogether. 

Fig. 9. 28: Classic ERs “with 

V- Embryonal Neoplasms perivascular rosettes. 

Embryonal tumors of the central nervous 
system (CNS) manifest as highly cellular, poorly differentiated, and mitotically active 
neoplasms that are reminiscent of the developing embryonic nervous system. Such 
tumors constitute the most common group of malignant pediatric brain tumors. Often 
referred to as “small blue cell tumors,” they are biologically aggressive and have a 
tendency to disseminate along cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) pathways. This group includes the 
medulloblastoma, the atypical teratoid/ rhabdoid tumor (AT/RT), the embryonal tumor 
with multilayer rosettes, and a spectrum of other CNS embryonal tumors that were 
previously called “CNS primitive neuroectodermal tumors (PNETs).” All Embryonal 
neoplasms corresponds to WHO Grade 4. 

Medulloblastoma 
See chapter 3 

Tumors of the cranial and paraspinal nerves 

Schwannomas 
Schwannomas account for 8% of all intracranial tumors, 85% of cerebellopontine angle 
tumors, and ~ 30% of spinal nerve root tumors. Approximately 90% of cases are solitary 
and sporadic and 4% arise in the setting of NF2. Of the 5% of schwannomas that are 
multiple but not associated with NF2, some may be associated with schwannomatosis. 
The peak incidence is in the fourth to sixth decades of life. 
Clinically, peripherally situated schwannomas may present as incidental (asymptomatic) 
paraspinal tumors, as spinal nerve tumors with radicular pain and signs of nerve root / 

493 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVEKDEMYLANTING DISEASES 

DISEASES TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

spinal cord compression, or as eighth cranial nerve tumors with related symptoms 
(including hearing loss, tinnitus, and occasional vertigo). Motor symptoms are uncommon 
because schwannomas favor sensory nerve roots. Bilateral vestibular tumors are the 
hallmark of NF2. Pain is the most common presentation for schwannomas in patients with 
schwannomatosis. 
Morphology (Gross and Microscopic): Refer to locomotor module. 

Vi- Meningiomas 
Meningiomas are predominantly benign tumors that arise from arachnoid meningothelial 
cells. Most meningiomas correspond histologically to WHO grade 1 (benign). Certain 
histological subtypes or meningiomas, with specific combinations of morphological 
parameters, are associated with less favorable clinical outcomes and correspond 
histologically to WHO grades 2 (20-25%- Atypical meningiomas) and 3 (1-6%- Anaplastic 
meningiomas). 
They usually occur in adults and are often attached to the dura. Overall, females are at 
greater risk than males. 
lonizing radiation is the only established environmental risk factor for meningioma. An 
association between hormones and meningioma risk is suggested. 
Meningiomas commonly occur as sporadic solitary tumors in the general population and 
may be found at autopsy in asymptomatic individuals. They also occur in ~50% of 
individuals with the inherited disorder neurofibromatosis 2 (NF2), which involves 
inactivation of the NF2 gene on chromosome 22, encoding the merlin tumor suppressor. 
About 60% of sporadic solitary meningiomas occur due to merlin inactivation and usually 
display loss of one copy of chromosome 22. 
The overall prognosis is determined by the lesion size and location, surgical accessibility, 
and histologic grade. 
Gross: Most meningiomas are rubbery or firm, well-demarcated, sometimes lobulated, 
rounded masses that feature broad dural attachment (Fig. 9.29). Occasional meningiomas 
invade into the adjacent skull, where they may induce characteristic hyperostosis. 
Adjacent brain is often compressed but rarely frankly invaded. In certain sites, particularly 
along the sphenoid wing, meningiomas may grow as a flat, carpet-like mass, a pattern 
called en-plague meningioma. 
Microscopic: 
Meningiomas, WHO grade 1: Among the varied histologic variants are syncytial, named 
for whorled clusters of cells without visible cell membranes; fibroblastic, with elongated 
cells and abundant collagen deposition between them; transitional, which shares features 
of the syncytial and fibroblastic types; psammomatous, with numerous psammoma 
bodies (Fig. 9.30). 
Atypical meningiomas, WHO grade 2: A meningioma of intermediate grade between 
benign and malignant forms, with increased mitotic activity, brain invasion on histology, 
or at least three of the following features: increased cellularity, small cells with a high 
nuclear-to-cytoplasmic ratio, prominent nucleoli, sheeting (i.e. uninterrupted patternless 
or sheet-like growth), and foci of spontaneous necrosis. 
Anaplastic (malignant) meningiomas, WHO grade 3 exhibit overtly malignant cytology 
(resembling that of carcinoma, melanoma, or high-grade sarcoma) and/or markedly 
elevated mitotic activity (> 20 mitoses per 10 high-power). 

494



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE&DEMYLANTING DISEASES 
DISEASES TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Fig. 9. 29: Meningioma: Gross of the left parasagittal region of the i lobe, 
Microscopic appearance with whirling and psammoma bodies 

Vil- Primary Central Nervous System Lymphoma 
- Primary CNS lymphoma, occurring mostly as diffuse large 8B cell lymphomas, accounts 

for 2% of extranodal lymphomas and 1% of intracranial tumors. 
- It is the most common CNS neoplasm in immunosuppressed persons, in whom the 

tumors are nearly always positive for the oncogenic Epstein-Barr virus. 
- In non-immunosuppressed populations, the age spectrum is relatively wide, with the 

incidence increasing after 60 years of age. 
- Primary brain lymphoma is an aggressive disease with relatively poor response to 

chemotherapy as compared with peripheral lymphomas. 

ViII- Germ Cell Tumors 

- Primary brain germ cell tumors occur along the midline, most commonly in the pineal 
and the suprasellar regions. 

- They account for 0.2% to 1% of brain tumors in people of European descent but as 
many as 10% of brain tumors in persons of Japanese ethnicity. 

- They are a tumor of the young, with 90% occurring during the first 2 decades of life. 
- Germ cell tumors in the pineal region show a strong male predominance. 
- The most common primary CNS germ cell tumor is germinoma, a tumor that closely 

resemble testicular seminoma. 

Metastatic Tumors 

- Metastatic lesions, mostly carcinomas, account for approximately one fourth to one half 
of intracranial tumors. 

- Approximately 80% of all brain metastases are located in the cerebral hemispheres 15% in 
the cerebellum, and 5% in the brain stem. The majority of metastases affecting the spinal 
cord expand from the vertebral body or paravertebral tissues into the epidural space. 

- The most common primary sites are lung, breast, skin (melanoma), kidney, and 
gastrointestinal tract—together these account for about 80% of cases. 

- Gross: metastases form sharply demarcated masses and elicit edema. 
- Microscopic: the boundary between tumor and brain parenchyma is sharp with 

surrounding reactive gliosis. 

495 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE&DEMYLANTING DISEASES 
DISEASES TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Familial Tumor Syndromes 

Several inherited syndromes caused by mutations in various tumor suppressor genes are 
associated with an increased risk of particular types of cancers. Examples of those syndromes 
with particular involvement of the CNS are Tuberous Sclerosis and von Hippel-Lindau Disease. 

Von Hippel-Lindau Disease: 
An autosomal dominant disorder caused by germline mutations of the VHL tumor suppressor 
gene, located on chromosome 3p. The von Hippel-Lindau disease tumor suppressor protein 
(VHL protein) plays a key role in cellular oxygen sensing. 

Table 9.4: Sites of involvement in von Hippel-Lindau disease 

Organ/Tissue Tumours Non-neoplastic lesions 

CNS Haemangioblastoma 
Eye (retina) Haemangioblastoma 
Kidney Clear cell renal cell Cysts 

carcinoma 

Adrenal gland Phaeochromocytoma 
Pancreas Neuroendocrine islet cell | Cysts 

tumours 
Inner ear Endolymphatic sac tumour 
Epididymis Papillary cystadenoma 

Haemangioblastoma: See chapter 3. 

496



oo] 
CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE&DEMYLANTING DISEASES 

DISEASES TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Cognitive Dysfunction and Memory Impairment 

Memory 

Definition 

Memory refers to the processes that allows us to record, store, and later retrieve 

experiences and information. 

Anatomical basis of memory 

the hippocampus and related structures have been implicated as a site for the consolidation 

of memory. 

The hippocampal formation consists of (regions CA1, CA2, CA3), the dentate gyrus and the 

subiculum. 

Types of memory 

A-Sensory memory: 

- Hold large amount of information 

-Very brief {visual }2 second, auditory 3 sec) 

-Registered at the sense receptors {visual iconic store, auditory: echoic store) 

-Based on electrical changes 

B-Short Term memory (STM): 

- A memory store that temporarily holds a limited amount of information. 

-Limited capacity (7+ 2 bits of information) 

-Limited duration (15-20 seconds). 

- Limited storage. 

- Information could pass to the long-term memory by rehearsal or consolidation based on 

chemical changes. 

- How to assess? 

- Tell the patient three word and ask about them later during the examination. 

C-Long Term memory (LTM): 

-Unlimited capacity. 

-Very long duration. 

-Permanent but subjected to distortion or replacement. 

-Subdivided into: 

Declarative: 

HB Episodic memory is our store of knowledge concerning personal experiences: when, 

where, and what happened in the episodes of our lives. Your recollections of childhood 

friends, a favorite movie. 

497 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE&DEMYLANTING DISEASES 
DISEASES TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Dementia: Types, Causes, and Clinical Considerations 

Introduction 

-Dementia is a broad term used to describe a group of neurodegenerative conditions 

characterized by a progressive decline in cognitive function, including memory, language, 

problem-solving, and other higher-order mental processes. Dementia is defined as a clinical 

syndrome characterized by a persistent and often progressive decline in cognitive function 

that interferes with a person's ability to perform everyday activities. This impairment goes 

beyond the normal age-related cognitive changes and can significantly impact an individual's 

quality of life, social interactions, and independence. 

-The global incidence of dementia is on the rise, largely due to the aging of the world’s 

population. According to the World Health Organization, the number of people living with 

dementia is projected to increase from an estimated 55 million in 2020 to 78 million by 2030 

and 139 million by 2050. 

-This surge in prevalence highlights the critical need for comprehensive understanding and 

effective management of this condition. 

- Types of Dementia: Dementia can be broadly classified into two main categories: 
reversible and irreversible. 

-Reversible dementias are those that can be caused by underlying conditions that can be 

treated, leading to the potential for cognitive function improvement or even restoration. 

Irreversible dementias, on the other hand, are progressive neurodegenerative disorders that 

result in permanent and often worsening cognitive impairment. 

Reversible Causes of Dementia include, but are not limited to, the following: 

eo Alcoholism 

e Drug/medication intoxication 

+ Vitamin deficiencies: B1, B6, B12 

* Endocrine disorders: Thyroid, parathyroid, adrenal hypo- or hyperfunction 

¢ Organ failure: Liver, kidney, pulmonary 

* Chronic infections: Neurosyphilis, PMLE, tuberculosis, fungal, protozoal 

e Chronic inflammation: Sarcoidosis, coeliac disease, Whipple's disease 

e Surgical conditions: Sub-dural hematoma, normal-pressure hydrocephalus (NPH), primary 

and metastatic brain tumors 

Psychiatric disorders: Depression, schizophrenia, conversion disorder. 



CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE&DEMYLANTING DISEASES 

DISEASES TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

Irreversible Causes of Dementia : is the most common form of dementia and is characterized 

by a progressive and permanent decline in cognitive function. 

-The four most prevalent types of irreversible dementia are: 1. **Alzheimer's Disease** 2. 

**Vascular Dementia** 3. **Frontotemporal Dementia** 4. **Lewy Body Dementia** Each 

of these subtypes of dementia has distinct underlying pathophysiology, clinical 

manifestations, and management approaches. 

-Alzheimer's Disease Pathophysiology Alzheimer's disease (AD): is the most common form of 

dementia, accounting for approximately 60-80% of all cases. The primary pathological 

hallmarks of AD include the accumulation of amyloid-beta (AB) peptides and the formation of 

neurofibrillary tangles composed of hyperphosphorylated tau protein. The deposition of AB 

peptides leads to the formation of senile plaques, which disrupt synaptic function and 

ultimately result in neuronal death and widespread brain atrophy. The hyperphosphorylation 

of tau protein, on the other hand, causes the microtubule-associated protein to form tangles 

within neurons, impairing their normal function and contributing to neurodegeneration. 

These pathological changes are believed to be driven by a complex interplay of genetic, 

environmental, and lifestyle factors, leading to a gradual and progressive decline in cognitive 

abilities. 

Clinical Presentation: The characteristic clinical presentation of Alzheimer's disease is a 

gradual and insidious onset of memory impairment, typically beginning with the inability to 

form new memories (anterograde amnesia). As the disease progresses, other cognitive 

domains, such as language, visuospatial skills, and executive function, become increasingly 

affected. Patients with Alzheimer's disease may also experience changes in personality, mood, 

and behavior, including apathy, depression, agitation, and delusions. The course of the disease 

is typically marked by a steady decline in cognitive and functional abilities, eventually leading 

to a complete dependence on caregivers for activities of daily living. 

Diagnostic Investigations: The diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease is primarily based on a 

comprehensive clinical evaluation, which includes a thorough medical history, cognitive and 

neuropsychological assessments, and the exclusion of other potential causes of dementia. 

Additionally, the following diagnostic investigations may be employed: 

1. **Neuroimaging™*: Structural imaging techniques, such as magnetic resonance imaging 

(MRI) or computed tomography (CT), can identify patterns of brain atrophy associated with 

Alzheimer's disease, particularly in the hippocampus and medial temporal lobe regions. 

Cerebrospinal Fluid Analysis, Genetic Testing**: In a small percentage of cases, Alzheimer's 

disease can be linked to specific genetic mutations, and genetic testing may be considered, 

particularly in individuals with a strong family history of the condition. 

Treatment and Management: The management of Alzheimer's disease involves a 

multifaceted approach that combines pharmacological and non-pharmacological 

interventions. 

500



| 
CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVE&DEMYLANTING DISEASES 

DISEASES TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

The primary pharmacological treatments include: 

1. **Cholinesterase Inhibitors**: Drugs such as donepezil, rivastigmine, and galantamine, 

which work by inhibiting the breakdown of acetylcholine, a neurotransmitter important for 

cognitive function. 

2. ** NMDA Receptor Antagonists**: Memantine, which acts by modulating the activity of the 

N-methyi-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor, can be used alone or in combination with 

cholinesterase inhibitors. 

In addition to pharmacological interventions, non-pharmacological approaches, such as 

cognitive stimulation, physical activity, and caregiver support, play a crucial role in managing 

the symptoms of Alzheimer's disease and improving the quality of life for both patients and { 

their families. 

501 



LL ———— EE —— 

CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Chapter — X 

MISCELANEOUS AND EMBRIOLOGY 

502



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Chapter X: MISCELANEOUS AND EMBRIOLOGY 

Intended Learning Outcomes (ILOs): 

By the end of this chapter the student should be able to: 
Clarify the basic concepts of dopaminergic pathways in the CNS and their relevance 
to antipsychotics effects. 
Classify antipsychotics according to their mechanism of action. 
Recognize the adverse effects of typical antipsychotics. 
Realize the advantages of atypical antipsychotics over typical antipsychotics. 
Identify the therapeutic indications of lithium. 
Predict the serious adverse effects of lithium 
Describe the difference between drug Abuse, drug misuse, drug dependence 
and concepts relating to the development of drug addiction. 
Identify the anatomical areas of the brain involved in the reward (pleasure) 
pathway and the neurotransmitter systems which activate the reward 
pathway. 
Specify the anatomical areas and receptors involved in activation from 
psychoactive drugs. 
Predict the anatomical areas and receptors involved in the withdrawal from 
psychoactive drugs. 
Apply the pharmacological basis for proper selection of the drugs used in the 
management of intoxication and withdrawal symptoms of substances abuse. 
Describe the formation, structure, derivatives, source of innervation and blood supply 
of each pharyngeal arches. 
List the derivatives of each pharyngeal pouch & pharyngeal clefts. 
Describe the steps of formation and the sources of face, nose, palate 
Identify the related congenital anomalies of pharyngeal arches, lips, face, nose and 
palate. 
Describe the steps of formation, histogenesis and fate of the neural tube. 
Discuss the development and the congenital malformations of the spinal cord and 
brain. 
Describe the site of individual cranial nerve nuclei within the different functional 
rnhhimne in tho hrain ctam 

503 

Sa ssA  m— 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANQUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

ANTIPSYCHOTIC DRUGS 

e Antipsychotics are drugs used to control manifestations of psychosis’. 
Manifestations of Psychosis (mind is separated from reality) 

1. Hallucinations (perception without stimulus): e.g. auditory {most frequent), visual, 
tactile... 

2. Delusions (False fixed beliefs): e.g. paranoid (suspicious) persecution (people are 
conspiring against him), grandeur (believes he is a genius). 

3. Incoherent speech & abnormal behavior (aggression, agitation). 
Etiologoyf Psychosis 

1. Psychiatric causes: Schizophrenia, Bipolar disorder, Delusional disorder ...etc. 
2. Non-psychiatric causes: Dementia, epilepsy, Cushing Syndrome, Brain tumors or 

trauma, drugs e.g. alcohol, cannabis, cocaine, amphetamines, corticosteroids .....etc. 
Schizophrenia (the most classic Prevalence 1% worldwide) 
e |t is a chronic psychotic mental disorder characterized by disturbances in cognition, 

emotion, perception, thinking, and behavior (DSM-5). Characterized by: 
eo Positive symptoms: Hallucinations, delusions, disorganized speech & behavior and 

Hostility. 

oe Negative symptoms: (5A) Affect flattening (flat emotions), Alogia (decrease speech), 
Anhedonia, Amotivation & Asociality intellectual dysfunction. 

e Cognitive Symptoms: There is defect in attention, Working memory and Executive function. 

Dopaminergic and serotonergic theories of Schizophrenia’! (Fig. 10.1) 

- Schizophrenic symptoms may result from increased mesolimbic dopamine activity at Da- 
receptors (positive symptoms) and decreased prefrontal cortex “PFC” or mesocortical 
dopamine activity at Di-receptors (negative symptoms and cognitive impairment). 

- All antipsychotics (Typical & Atypical) block mesolimbic D,-receptors = improve positive 
symptoms. 

- Only Atypical antipsychotics block 5-HT2A receptor (presynaptic heterotrophic negative 
control on dopamine) - 1 dopamine at PFC or mesocortical Di-receptors = improve 
negative symptoms and cognitive impairment. 

0 Psychosis (psyche = mind/soul, and -osis = abnormal ") refers to an abnormal condition of the mind. 
"I Other theories 
1. Serotonin Theory: S-H1TA  receptor activation in PFC —1DA release at D; receptors and 1 Ach in PFC, §- 
HT?7 receptor Blockade — improve negative symptoms, antidepressant & pro-cognitive actions. 
2. Glutamate Theory: (observed effects of the NMDA antagonists phencyclidine and ketamine) 

-Hypofunction of cortical glutamate NMDA receptor — 1 D> receptor function in himbic cortex and | Dy 
receptor function in PFC — positive and negative symptoms of schizophrenia. 

504 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Dopamine Pathways Relevant to 
Schizophrenia Symptoms 

Aiesocortical pathway 

mesatimbic pathway dysfunction 

Negative and cognitive 
Symploms 

i ED) PSYCHOPHARMACOLOGY 

Fig. 10.1: Dopamine Theory of Schizophrenia 

Mechanism of Action of Antipsychotics 

e All anti psychotics block D; receptors in the mesolimbic system. 
e Atypical antipsychotics block also 5-HT2A receptor in mesocortical pathway. 

Classification of Antipsychotic Drugs 72 

Typical Atypical 
DA Antagonists 5HT/DA Antagonists 

Chlorpromazine (prototype) - Risperidone - Aripiprazole 
Thioridazine Clozapine - Olanzapine- 

Haloperidol - Fluphenazine Quetiapine. 

Advantage of Typical Antipsychotics 
1.Cheaper than Atypical antipsychotics 
2. Fast acting IM (e.g. Haloperidol 5mg) and inhalation’? for agitation. 
3. long-acting Injectable “Depot” formulations useful for patients with difficulty adhering to 
therapy and also less Extrapyramidal Side effects (EPS) e.g. Haloperidol decanoas (50mg) 

’2 Typical agents have a high DA to SHT blocking ratio. Atypical agents block 5-HT, receptors with equal efficacy 
as D, receptors. — 

- Other atypical agents: Lurasidone — Paliperidone- ziprasidone. 
"3 Loxapine inhaled recently FDA-approved mg for the acute treatment of agitation associated with schizophrenia 
or bipolar I disorder in adults. 

505 



— - ne 

CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Typical Antipsychotics ’* 

Uses Side Effects 

A. Blockade of Central D2 Receptors 

I. Antipsychotics <+—— Meso- Basal 1. Extrapyramidal Side 

1.Violent patient: limbic Ganglia effects 
calms in few hours (see next page) 

2.1% Psychosis 
(4 hallucinations & 
delusions in few wks.): 
a. Schizophrenia Gynecomastia 

b. Mania in bipolar 
depression Galactorrhea 

c. Psychotic depression Arnanorhes 

3. 2% Psychosis 
Brain tumors — cocaine 
Dementia Infertility 

II. Antiemetic Hypothalamus -. * Prolactin 
‘ CZ I] & Pituitary 3. © Body weight 

B. Blockade of Autonomic Receptors 

Hi i» 4. Sedation - "Body weight 

{ —1> 5. Atropine side effects 
M Dry mouth — confusion 

! constipation — urine retention 
QL 
—1» 6. Postural Hypotension 

7. Cardiotoxic (QT interval) 

C. Miscellaneous 8. Convulsions 

9. Corneal- lens deposits. 

10. Cholestatic jaundice 

4+QT interval occurs especially with thioridazine which also causes retinal deposits. 

506



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Extrapyramidal Side Effects (EPS) 

Disorder Features Mechanism Management 

1. Akathisia Motor Propranolol, a B- 
restlessness Oe vo nskade of D blocker is the drug of 

2. Dystonia Muscle ———y " er k choice in Akathisia 
spasm, e.g. ganglia 
neck 

torticollis — Anticholinergics, e.g. 
3. Parkinsonism | Rigidity Blockade of D; receptors | henztropine may be 

Hypokinesia | in basal ganglia given routinely with 
Tremors -> relative? in antipsychotics as 

cholinergic activity prophylaxis against 

4 t extrapyramidal side 
DA ACh effects but may 

Relieved by exacerbate tardive 
anticholinergics dyskinesia 

4.Tardive Abnormal Supersensitivity of DA Preventive: 
dyskinesia involuntary | receptors following - Least possible dose 
(late, after > 6 movements: | chronic blockade of antipsychotics 
months up to 2- | - chewing | - Minimal duration 
5 years) - sucking 1111 it - Avoid routine use of 

- "fly —- DA ACh anticholinergics 
catching” Exacerbated by Treatment: 
movement anticholinergics -Switch to Atypical or 
of tongue clozapine 

- Antidyskinesia 
drug’® 

N.B: Neuroleptic malignant syndrome (rare) 
e Muscle rigidity, hyperpyrexia, altered mental status and stupor, unstable blood 

pressure, and myoglobinemia. 
e |t is due to rapid excessive blockade of central DA receptors in patients sensitive to 

extrapyramidal effects of neuroleptics (idiosyncrasy). 
¢ Management: 

1. Discontinue the antipsychotic 
2. Muscle relaxants (diazepam or dantrolene) 
3. Antiparkinsonian drugs, Dopamine Agonist bromocriptine. 

> Specific anti-dyskinetic treatment: a.1% choice VMAT2 inhibitors Valbenazine or Deutetrabenazine, b. others 
possible e.g. tetrabenazine, amantadine, botulinum toxin {for focal tardive dystonia), levetiracetam, 
propranolol, Gingko biloba extract, Clonazepam and vitamin B6.. 

507 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOQUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Therapeutusiecs  of Antipsychotics 
C. Psychiatric Disorders 

1. Schizophrenia and other psychosis. 
2. Tranquilizers in agitation e.g. Haloperidol 
3. Manic & mixed symptoms in Bipolar Disorders. 
4. Autism (Risperidone, Aripiprazole) 
5. Adjunctive agents in refractory depression (Aripiprazole, Quetiapine). 

D. Non-psychiatric Diseases: 
1. Anti-emetic in sever vomiting e.g. Chlorpromazine. 
2. Intractable hiccups (Chlorpromazine) 
3. Off-label Hypnotics for insomnia: Quetiapine, Clozapine, Chlorpromazine. 

LITHIUM CARBONATE (Li 
e Monovalent cation similar to Na. 
e Mainly used in bipolar manic depression as: Li is the gold standard (Fig. 10.2) 
1. Mood stabilizer: 4 Mood swings (maintenance therapy). 
2. Anti-manic: ¥ Manic behavior in manic phase (antipsychotics are added for rapid 

control of severe mania since the effect of lithium is delayed for several weeks). 
oe Other uses: 

1. Recurrent endogenous depression. 
2. Adjunct to antidepressants in refractory unipolar depression. 

N.B.: The first-line treatment for bipolar depression is lithium or lamotrigine (Mood 
stabilization and antidepressant effects). 

e Antipsychotics are used as monotherapy or adjunctive therapy with lithium or valproate in 
all phases of Bipolar disorder and they are more effective than [lithium and anticonvulsants 

in acute mania because of delayed onset Li (5-20 days), Valproate (3-10 days). 

Antidepressants + Li* +/or Valproa 

Mood Stabilizer ——_— Mania [Antipsychotics 

& Antipsychotics 
(2) 

Lit 

Euthymic / \ 

\ / (1) 
Lamotrigine 

(3) J tive mood stabilizers in 

Depression Valproate p-1j* toxicity or ineffectiveness. 
carbamazepine 

Lithi=u Lmi 

Antidepressants monotherapy NOT recommended => Switch to mania. 
They are only used simultaneously with mood stabilizer (lithium or....) 

Fig.10.2: Drug Treatment of Bipolar Manic Depression 

509 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Table10.1: Adverse Effects, Toxicity & Precautions of Lithium 

Adverse Effects Precautions 

1. CNS: fine tremors (=50%), Cognition. | Coarse tremors & GIT symptoms 
are early warning signs of toxicity. 

2. GIT: nausea - vomiting - diarrhea. 

3. Renal: 
- Antagonizes ADH: polyuria = thirst. e Monitor kidney function. 
- Nephrogenic diabetes insipidus (=30%). 
- Renal tubular damage. 

4. Thyroid: Benign enlargement with or e Monitor thyroid function. 
? without hypothyroidism (= 10%). 

: 5. Toxic drug: e Monitor Li* serum level. 
a) Narrow Tl (Therapeutic 0.6-1.2 mEq/l e Adjust dose in reduced Li* 

and Toxic >1.5 mEq/l). excretion, as in: 
b) Long tx. (= 24 h) 1. Na* depletion by diuretics. 
¢) Cumulative. 2. Renal dysfunction. 

3. Old age (|, renal function). 

Lithium Toxicity: Serum Li* level > 1.5 mEq/l and Lethal level > 2 mEq/l 
Manifestations: 
e¢ Vomiting - diarrhea - coarse tremor (early signs of toxicity). 
Ataxia -Drowsiness- slurred speech = arrhythmia- CV collapse. 
Confusion - convulsions - coma. 

Management (No antidote)’ 
Stop Li, Gastric lavage and A charcoal if acute ingestion 
PM Fluid intake {maintain electrolytes) 
Diuresis: Osmotic or Forced (NEVER thiazide or loop D) 
Dialysis: Hemodialysis (or Peritoneal Dialysis but less effective) Repeat/6-8hr 
till Nontoxic Li range. 

’ Hemodialysis Is the most effective especialilfy: 
Severe Toxicity symptoms and signs or if Fluid intake contraindicated (CHF, Cirrhosis) or Li 
level > 3 mEq/L or renal failure (RF). 

Li is not metabolized; Li is a monovalent Cation and the body deals with it as Na 
completely excreted by the kidney so “Li is Best Choice in Hepatic impairment” 

7 Li+ is excreted unchanged renally. Li+ is transported by Na/H exchange (mainly in PCT) and Na channel (Li is 
transported in place of Na+ for tubular reabsorption); therefore: - Na* depletion (e.g. by diuretics) = 1 Li* 
reabsorption 21 serum Li* level = Li* toxicity. NSAIDs, ACEls & carbamazepine (1 serum Li* level) While, 
Xanthines (theophylline, caffeine) = { Li Level. -Na overloading {Na HCOs) is not recommended in Li toxicity. 

510 

i Aba  



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

DRUG ABUSE 

Drug abuse: Intentional and inappropriate use of a psychoactive drug (usually self- 
administration) resulting in physical, emotional, financial, social and intellectual harmful 
consequences seeking for euphoria or alter perception. 
Drug abuse results in: 

1. Physical dependence: “A drug is needed to function normally”. It indicates an altered 
physiological state due to repeated administration of a drug, the cessation of which 
results in a specific syndrome (Withdrawal Syndrome). 

2. Tolerance: { Drug response following its continuous use =» larger dose is required to 
produce the same initial effect =» loss of control of addict over amount of drug used. 

3. Drug addiction®': Compulsive repeated use of a substance, despite its negative, 
harmful or dangerous effects. There is craving and Loss of control over taking a 
substance. it was considered as a psychological dependence. 

4. Craving: Severe compulsion to take a drug repeatedly to re-experience a pleasant 
feeling, e.g. euphoria. Due to 4 of DA in reward system (NAc). 

Classifofi Drcugas tof iAbousne 
I. CNS Depressants: 

1. Sedative hypnotics: barbiturates - benzodiazepines — alcohol. 
2. Narcotics: heroin - morphine - pethidine - codeine. 

II. CNS Stimulants: caffeine - nicotine - cocaine — amphetamine - khat. 
Hl. Hallucinogens: LSD -Mescaline -Phencyclidine (PCP)-Ketamine- DMT. 
IV. Cannabinoids: Natural (Hashish “Hash”, Marijuana or Cannabis) and Synthetic Voodoo 

and Strox. 
V. Inhalants: induce euphoria and hallucinations. 

1) Solvents in glues & paints (strong dependence). 
2) Anesthetics; nitrous oxide & ether (moderate dependence). 

Short-acting agents have more Abuse occurs and more severe withdrawal 
syndrome than that following longer-acting agents. 

Reward (Pleasure) Pathway include: (plays a key role in addiction) 
1. Nucleus accumbens (NAc) = Pleasure center (Fig. 10.3) 
2. Ventral tegmental area (VTA). 
3. Prefrontal cortex (PFC). 

In either “NATURAL” e.g., food, water, sex, ... or “ARTIFICIAL” e.g., drugs rewarding stimulus, 
information travels from the VTA to the NAc and then up to the PFC. VTA contains dopamine 
(DA) neurons which release DA in the NAc (= Euphoria ) and in the PFC (Behavior). 

89Drug misuse: unintentional or inappropriate use of the prescribed over the counter drugs (or using drugs 

without a prescription). Misuse: taking a drug in a manner or at a dose that was not recommended by the 

physician. 

81 It is possible to be dependent on a drug without being addicted. Although, if one is addicted they are most 
likely also dependent. e.g. A terminal cancer patient being treated with morphine for pain will experience 
withdrawal if the drug is stopped, but they are not a compulsive user of the drug therefore they are not addicted. 

311 

a 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Prefrontal cortex 

a a 

(Nucleus accumbens) 

Fig. 10.3: The Reward or Pleasure Pathway 

Psychoactive drugs acting on different parts of reward pathway: 

e Heroin, Alcohol, Hashish (Cannabis) and Nicotine (Tobacco) act on the VTA stimulating 
the dopaminergic neuron cell body to release DA in the NAc = DA in NAc =>Euphoria. 
5. N.B.: Alcohol induces euphoria via release of endogenous opioids in VTA. 

e BZD stimulate DA neurons in VTA & enhance euphoric effect of other substances 
e Amphetamines and Cocaine act directly on NAc dopaminergic nerve terminal to 

stimulate release and/or inhibit the reuptake of DA—>* DA in NAc =» Euphoria. 

In all rewards, dopamine is the final activation chemical that induce 
euphoria when increased in the NAc 

Reward Deficiency 

~ Prolonged drug use = neurodegeneration of DA neurons in the reward pathway = 
chronic feelings of anxiety, depression and an inability to just feel good. And {, DA in NAc 
— development of craving (an intense desire for taking the drug). 

— The person can only feel normal when under the influence of the drug and developed 
negative and positive reinforcement? to take the drug. 

10. The key elements of withdrawal stage are Corticotrophin Releasing Factor (CRF) 
and noradrenergic neurons in the amygdala which are activated during dependence (the most 
accepted theory). 
N.B.: Sympathetic hyperactivity during Heroin withdrawal > 1*Heart rate, *Blood pressure. 

82 Negative reinforcement: Escape and avoidance of negative affect is the motive for addictive drug use while 
positive reinforcement: Pleasurable sensations associated with a taking the drug or addiction behavior, 
motivating the person to repeat drug intake 

512 

© 00 NO 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Management of Withdrawal “or Addition” in substance Abuse®* 

|. Barbiturates (Strong Dependence) and BZDs (Moderate Dependence) 
Acute Effects: Euphoria - relieve anxiety and insomnia. 
Risks of Chronic Abuse: Memory loss. 
Withdrawal Syndrome (severe with barbiturates - mild with BZDs). 
e Insomnia - anxiety - tremors - delirium - hallucinations - convulsions. 

Management of Barbiturates & BZDs Abuse 
e Replace short-acting agent by a longer-acting one =» less severe withdrawal: 

0 Phenobarbital for pentobarbital. 
0 Diazepam for clonazepam, alprazolam, flunitrazepam. 

ll. Alcohol (Strong Dependence) 

Mechanism: acts on GABA-A receptor->4* GABA effect (cross tolerance with BZDs) and |, 
glutamate action (NMDA receptor antagonist) & release endogenous opioid in VTA (euphoric 
effect). 
Acute Effects®®: Euphoria - relaxation - increased self-confidence. 
Withdrawal Syndrome 
e Similar to barbiturates with delirium tremens: delirium - tremors - psychosis (visual 

hallucinations of crawling bugs). 
Risks of Chronic Abuse (Alcoholism) 

1. Withdrawn, homicidal or suicidal individual - work & family problems. 
2. Liver cirrhosis - peptic ulcer — cardiomyopathy. 
3. Dementia - peripheral neuropathy. 
4. Thiamine deficiency => Wernicke-Korsakoff syndrome (ophthalmoplegia, ataxia, confusion, 

psychosis). 

Management of Alcohol Abuse 
1. Diazepam or chlordiazepoxide (longer acting sedatives). 

a. Replaces alcohol (gradual withdrawal of diazepam is smoother). 
b. Anticonvulsant (controls convulsions of withdrawal syndrome). 

2. Thiamine supplements. 
3. Psychotherapy (group therapy) together with drugs to avoid relapse following 

detoxification: 
a. Disulfiram (Antabuse): 

e Inhibits aldehyde dehydrogenase involved in alcohol metabolism =» accumulation 
of acetaldehyde =» nausea & vomiting & flushing (disulfiram reaction). To avoid 
this reaction, patients give up drinking. 

b. Naltrexone: block opioid receptors block euphoric effect= Jd, relapse. 
¢. Acamprosate: weak NMDA antagonist, GABA A receptor activator =»c raving. 

83 Also, Haloperidol injection for Agitation and psychosis (especially in stimulants) and Anti-impulsivity Drugs: 
To reduce impulsive behavior in addicts as SSRIs e.g. sertraline, and antiepileptics e.g. valproate and 
carbamazepine. 

% Treatment of alcoho! Intoxication: (1) IV glucose to correct hypoglycemia (to avoid fatal fits) as alcohol induces 
pancreatitis destroying B-cells — release insulin. (2) Thiamine 100 mg IV or IM to prevent neuropathy. 

513



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Ill. Opioids (Very Strong Dependence) 
Acute Effects 

1. Eupharia (rush). 
2. Apathy: drowsiness & hypo activity. 

Riskosf Chronic Abuse 

1. Fatal overdose - homicide - suicide - accidents. 
2. 1 Risk of infections due to syringes (hepatitis, AIDS) & ¢ immunity. 

Withdrawal Syndrome (sympathetic overactivity) 

1. Craving for the drug - anxiety - insomnia - tremors. 
2. Piloerection — mydriasis - lacrimation — rhinorrhea. 
3. Tachycardia - hypertension — hyperthermia- hot & cold flushes. 
4. Abdominal cramps - vomiting — diarrhea. 

Management of Opioid Abuse 

1. Symptomatic treatment of withdrawal symptoms 
e Anxiolytics - antiemetics — antispasmodics. 

e Clonidine: inhibits sympathetic discharge. 
2. Detoxification: Methadone or buprenorphine 
e Replace heroin or morphine by methadone. Gradual withdrawal of 
methadone (longer acting) is less severe. 

2. Maintenance: Naltrexone 
e Given chronically after detoxification to block opioid receptors =» loss of 
euphoric effects of opioids = loss of desire to take the drug. 

IV. Nicotine (Very Strong Craving) 

Mechanism: stimulates asf: nicotinic Ach receptors in VTA - DA release in reward pathway 
— reward experienced upon smoking =» craving = dependence... 
Acute Effects: euphoria - { anxiety - T concentration -dappetite 
Risks of Chronic Abuse: cancer, lung diseases, ischemic heart diseases. 
Withdrawal Syndrome: Insomnia - anxiety — aggressiveness - 1 appetite. 

‘ Management of Nicotine Abuse 

1. Psychotherapy (group therapy). 
2. Nicotine replacement by: nicotine gum - transdermal patch - oral inhaler ~ nasal spray. 
3. Bupropion: antidepressant and PDA = craving & Blocks a4B2 nAch R-> | Relapse. 
4. Varenicline®® : partial agonist at CNS aaf3, nicotinic Ach receptors => partial stimulation 

while competitively inhibiting nicotine binding = blocks ability of nicotine to stimulate 
DA system in VTA-> { craving & withdrawal syndrome. 

85 Taken one week before quitting smoking & continued for 12 weeks; repeated if necessary. 
Taken twice daily after meals with a full glass of water to nausea. 
Not recommended for <18 year- old smokers. May induce insomnia, mood changes or suicidal ideas. 

514 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

V. Cocaine Abuse 
Acute effects 
e |ncreased alertness & insomnia - decreased fatigue. 
e Euphoria (due toT CA}: intensity of euphoria depends upon route of administration: 

1. Intravenous =» intense euphoria (the rush) - 1 risk of infections. 
2. Intranasal  ~> less euphoria (the high) & nasal septal perforation. 
3. Smoking ~» intense euphoria & easy administration => 1 abuse. 

Withdrawal Syndrome 
e Fatigue - sleep - depression — overeating- Apathy- disorientation- very strong craving 
Overdose toxicity (during the run due to T catecholamines): Agitation- hallucinations- 
delustons- Arrhythmia,T BP- Myocardial infarction - cerebral accidents and Convulsions...... 
Risks with Chronic Abuse 
Psychosis with hallucinations & delusions. 
Managment of cocaine abuse 
Bupropion 88(J cravings & also treats depressive symptoms during withdrawal). 

VI. Amphetamine & Methamphetamine 

Similar to Cocaine; longer acting, less addictive but 1 risk of psychosis. 
Methylene-dioxy-methamphetamine (MDMA; ecstasy): CNS stimulant as amphetamine 

with hallucinogenic properties. 
Cathinone: is found in Khat & produces similar effects to amphetamines. 

Vil. Lysergic Acid Diethylamide (LSD) 

Taken recreationally not regularly => no dependence (BUT....)%". 
Acute Effects 
Euphoria & sensory changes: sights & sounds are distorted & fantastic. 
Hallucinations, delusions, illusions, Philosophical & creative thinking. 

Risks Associated with LSD Abuse 
e Bad trips: frightening hallucinations =» homicide or suicide. 
e Flashbacks: frightening hallucinations months after stopping drug. 
e Psychosis: in a borderline psychotic even after a single dose. 

Persistent Psychosis and flashbacks are two long-term effects of Hallucinogens. 

Management of LSD Abuse 
eo (Calm the patient during bad trips. 
e BZDs - antipsychotics. 

ER 

8 chemical structure of bupropion is similar to amphetamine 
%" The hallucinogens are classified as Schedule [ controlled substances; National Institute of Drug Abuse 
(NIDA, 2019) declared that there 1s dependence with regular used hallucinogens especially PCP& LSD. 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOQUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Vili. Cannabis 
Hashish, Marijuana & Bhang 

(obtained from cannabis plant) 
e THC (A9-tetrahydrocannabinol) is the most psychoactive principal in cannabis. 
e After inhalation, THC quickly reaches the brain to act on cannabinoid CB1 receptors and 

V1 vanilloid pain receptors. 

Acute Effects (CNS stimulation followed by depression, sleep & relaxation) 
1. Euphoria - uncontrollable laughter - time passes slowly. 
2. Increased perceptions (sights & sounds become more intense & fantastic). 
3. 4 Motor & mental skills (cannot drive a car or finish a sentence). 
4. Hallucinations & delusions (rare). 

¢ 5. Philosophical & creative thinking. 

Withdrawal syndrome®®: weak and usually mild 
? Irritability, Anxiety, Depression, Sweating, Confusion, Tremor, Insomnia, Body weight 

Risks of Chronic Abuse of Cannabis 

1. 1 Risk of psychosis. 
2. Red eyes (VD of conjunctival vessels, precedes serious drop in BP). 
3. Apathy (Amotivational syndrome) 
4. Sexual and Reproductive dysfunction (J, testosterone & sperm count and 
ovulation in female) & in pregnancy— miscarriage and ectopic pregnancy 

| 5. Gateway drug: opens the way to poly-drug abuse. 
6. The immune system impaired 

Management of Abuse: 
e Naltrexone® —Dronabinol — SSRIs e.g. Fluoxetine — Quetiapine. 

N.B.: Dronabilone & nabilone are synthetic analogues of THC used as antiemetics in cancer 
chemotherapy. 

88 NIDA, 2015 declared that cannabis dependence and addiction may develop in some cases (esp. with long 
regular use). 
8 Cannabis euphoric effect is suggested to be mediated partially via release of endogenius opioids. 

516 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

DEVE ENT OF HEAD AND NECK 

I. Pharvngeal arch 
(Figs. 10.4 to 10.8) 

- After formation of the head fold, the buccopharyngeal membrane is buried at the bottom 
of an ectodermal depression called stomodeum “primitive mouth” in between the 
forebrain cranially and the primitive heart caudally. 
In the 4th and 5th weeks, six elevated bars appear, on each side, in the region between the 
stomodeum and the primitive heart. They contribute in the development of the neck and 
face. 
They are called “Pharyngeal or Visceral arches” because they develop in the region which 
surrounds the primitive pharynx (the cranial part of the foregut). 

TT 

7 
Frontonasal prominence Frontonasal prominence 

Nasal placode 

Maxillary prominence 
> Maxillary prominence 

Stomodeum 

Mandibular arch Mandibular arch 

Pharyngeal arches 
d and 3rd 

Cardiac bulge Rd gD 

A B 
Fig. 10.4: Stomodeum is surrounded by 5 mesenchymal prominences 

A) 24 days, B) slightly older embryo 

They are also called “branchial arches” because they resemble the gills (branchia) of fishes 
however, the term pharyngeal is better. 
Each arch has 3 elements: 
1. An ectodermal covering 
2. An endodermal lining 
3. A mesenchymal core which is derived from 2 sources: 

a. The paraxial mesoderm: which forms the arch musculature (a group of striated 
muscles which may migrate). 

b. Migrating neural crest cells: which form a skeletal element (an arch cartilage). 
Five grooves are seen internally and externally between the arches. 
» The internal grooves, lined by endoderm, are called “pharyngeal pouches” 
>» The external grooves, lined by ectoderm, are called “pharyngeal clefts”. 
The endoderm and ectoderm in the bottom of the grooves are in contact, with no 
intervening mesoderm. These thin membranes rupture in fishes but remain intact in man. 
The mesenchyme of each arch is invaded by: 
1. An aortic arch which connects the aortic sac with the corresponding dorsal aorta. 
2. A cranial nerve derived from the adjacent hind brain. 
The arches appear in a cranio-caudal sequence. The 5th arch disappears early, leaving no 
remnants. 
The 1% arch divides into 2 prominences which project on the side of the stomodeum: a 
ventral mandibular prominence and a dorsal maxillary prominence. 

— 

517 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

1st arch 

Artery 

Neive Pharyngeal 
cleft 

Cartilage 
2nd arch 

Pharyngeal 
POUCH 3rd arch 

Ectoderm 
Endoderm 

Laryngeal 
opening wn i Spinal cord 

Fig. 10.5: Cut section of pharyngeal arches 

Pharyngeal pouches 

¥ / 

Teel lg alias 
eaw RWExEe  BF a Li —ar  

555% 4th aortic 
arch 

6th aortic 
arch 

Thyroid Esophagus 
Srna, 

x vr 
aw ww a 
we ¥ wd primordium 
a 
SS ple 

Dorsal 
Stomodeum Aortic sac aorla 

Trachea and lung bud 

Fig. 10.6: Pharyngeal pouches and aortic arches 

518 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Derivatives of the pharyngeal arches 
(Fig. 10.7) 

| Da gs! Skeletal element Musculature Nerve 

-2 cartilages develop: Ventral 
(Meckle’s) cartilage & dorsal 
cartilage in maxillary 
prominence. 
-Both disappear leaving two 
remnants (the incus & e Four muscles of 
malleus) at their dorsal ends mastication 
near the developing ear. -Temporalis 
-The mesenchyme around - Masseter 

1¢t Arch Meckle’s cartilage gives: - Lateral Pterygoid Mandibular 
(Mandibular 1. The mandible, by - Medial Pterygoid branch of 

membranous ossification. e + 4 other muscles: trigeminal N 
Arch) 2. Sphenomandibular - Tensor palati g 

| ligament. - Tensor tympani 
| 3. Spine of sphenoid. - Mylohyoid 
4. Anterior ligament of - Anterior belly of 
malleus. digastric 
-The mesenchyme in the 

| maxillary process gives: the 
maxilla, zygomatic, palatine & 
squamous temporal bones by 
membranous ossification. 

Its cartilage (Reichert’s * All apie of face, 
cartilage) gives: scalp & guricle 

gi Arch 1. Stapes » a ofey muscles: 

(Hyoid Arch ) 2. Styloid process ] trod 4 Facial N. 
3. Stylohyoid ligament : 

| - Post. Belly of digastric 
4. Lesser cornu & upper part R—
of the body of hyoid bone. 

3' cartilage gives: 
1. Lower part of the body of Glosso- 

3” Arch hyoid. Stylopharyngois pharyngeal N. 
2. Greater cornu of hyoid. 
Both 4'" & 5 cartilages fuse | - Cricothyroid 

th and give: - Levator palati Sup wo h 
4" Arch -» all laryngeal cartilages - Pharyngeal aryngea fo 

except cricoid & the Epiglottis. constrictors of vagus N. 
- All laryngeal muscles Recurrent 

6 Arch The 6” cartilage gives: except cricothyroid. krynaarl rere oF 
soa= -> cricoid cartilage the vagus N. 

519 

-= RB 5  pA ALELE — 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

CNV (trigeminal) 

CN Vl (facial) 

CN IX (glossopharyngeal) 

CN X (vagus) 

1st arch ] 

2nd arch 

3rd arch 

4th arch 

Temporalis 
Muscles of tacial muscle Aurfcularis 

expression muscle 

Malleus Occipitalis 

incus muscle 

Stapes 
- 

Styloid process 
Lesser horn of Masseter Posterior belly of 

hyoid bone muscle digastric muscle 

Meckel J Greater horn of Stylopharyngeus 

cartilage hyold bone Anterior belly of muscle 
digastric muscle 

Cricoid cartilage Thyroid cartilage 5 Pharyngeal muscle 

Fig. 10.7: Derivatives of pharyngeal arches 

Anomalies of arches: 
* First arch syndromes (Fig. 10.8) develop due to insufficient migration of neural crest cells 

into the first pharyngeal arch: 
1. Treacher Collins Syndrome (autosomal dominant) = underdevelopment of the zygomatic 

bones + defects of lower eyelids + deformed external ears. 
2. Pierre Robin Syndrome = hypoplesia of mandible + cleft palate + eye & ear defects. 

Fig. 10.8: A) Treacher Collins, B) Robin Sequence syndromes 

520 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Pharyngeal cl 
e Originally there were 5 clefts covered by ectoderm, but after disappearance of the 5% arch 
they become 4 only. (Fig. 10.9) 

¢ The 1% cleft persists & gives the external auditory meatus + the outer surface of the tympanic 
membrane. The auricle develops from 6 hillocks (elevations) that appear around the external 
auditory meatus and later fuse together. 

e The mesoderm of the 2nd arch proliferates causing its surface ectoderm to cover the 2", 3 
& 4!" clefts & finally it fuses with the ectodermal covering of the 6th arch. A temporary cavity 
lined with ectoderm “the cervical sinus” is formed and buried beneath the surface 
ectoderm. It soon disappears. 

Mandibular 
process I Primitive Auditory tube Foramen cecum 

Parathyroid A= /4 
gland (superior) ¥* | 

Sem EER onbice Ultimobranchial E= 
A bodv D 
Fig. 10.9: Development of the pharyngeal pouches and clefts 

Anomalies of clefts: (Fig. 10.10) 
1. Preauricular sinus: due to failure of fusion between some of the hillocks of the auricle 
2. Branchial cyst: due to failure of obliteration of the cervical sinus. The cyst may be found 
anywhere along the anterior border of sternomastoid, usually closteo the angle of mandible. 

3. Branchial fistula: 
a. External: due to failure of fusion between the 2" & 6" arches. 
b. Internal: due to rupture of the cervical sinus with the 2" pouch establishing 

communication with the interior of the pharynx. 

ee Papitne 
Extarnal audntory rj preauricular ( Tubotympanic 

mealus / tistulas \ c \y | 
* y/ /7  if 

hie y ) \ 7 Fr.2  7r e 

J FA | Palaline 
{ | tonsil 

\ intemal 
\ branchial 

fishda 

} Lateral 
/ N cervical 

“8 = A Fy by N cyst 
exomas A , 7{ J Stemocieidomastoid 
branchial $ ll ya muscle “ 
fistula rd al a EEL 

3 

B ¢ Ry As—  

Fig. 10.10: Lateral cervical cyst and fistula 

521 



CHAPTER X: | MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Pharyngeal pouches 
Originally there were 5 pairs of pharyngeal pouches, however the fifth is atypical and is usually 
considered a part of the fourth pouch. (Figs. 10.9 & 10.11) 

Table 10.2: Derivatives of pharyngeal pouches 

Pouch Derivatives 

- Its distal part widens => the lining of the middle ear cavity & mastoid antrum + 
1st the inner surface of tympanic membrane 

- Its proximal part remains narrow => the auditory (Eustachian) tube 

- Palatine tonsil 
2nd - Tonsillar fossa 

~_, | - Its dorsal part © Inferior parathyroid glands 
aH Its ventral part => Thymus 

Its dorsal part => Superior parathyroid glands 
ath The ultimobranchial body => produces the parafolllicular cells (C cells) of the 

| thyroid which secrete calcitonin hormone. 

Considered as a part of the 4th pouch. 
Sth Both form => the ultimobranchial body 

Audit tubs Ventral side 
Primitive uditory fu of pharynx Faramen 

auditory N= PI‘ es 
meatus Jg on SoA 

Palatine tonsil 

Superior 
parathyroid gland _§ 
(from 4th pouch) | 

infasior 

+) parathyroid gland— — \_ 0 Ny Fy 

Ultmobranchial body 8 1 FEES, 

Anomalies of pouches: 
Die George Syndrome (Fig. 10.12) 

(failure of development of the 3™ and 
4 pharyngeal pouches = No thymus & 
parathyroids + malformed mouth + 
nasal clefts + CVS anomalies. 

522 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Development of the Face 

The face develops from 5 swellings “prominences” which appear during the 4th week around the 
stomodeum (primitive mouth); due to migration of neural crest cells under the surface ectoderm, 
raising it. (Fig. 10.13) 
1. One frontonasal prominence above the stomodeum, ventral to the forebrain vesicle 
2. Two maxillary prominences on either side of the stomodeum; from the first pharyngeal arches. 
3. Two mandibular prominences under the stomodeum; from the first pharyngeal arches. 

Otic placode 

f Pharyngeal arches 
he 

\ / Frontonasal prominence 
Lens placode 

| Nasal placode 
Heart bulge 

Maxillary prominence 

Umbilical cord | 
| _. Mandibular arch 

us Pharyngeal arches 

Cardiac 2nd and 3rd 

A g Pee 
Fig.10.13: Position of pharyngeal arches 
A) 4 wks lateral view, B) 4.5 wks front view 

I. The Frontonasal Prominence 
- During the 5th week, two ectodermal thickenings called olfactory (or nasal) Placodes 

appear on each side of the frontonasal prominence. 
- Each placode becomes depressed at its center to form the olfactory pit (nasal sac). The 

margins of the placodes proliferate to form the medial and lateral nasal Prominences. 

Il. The Two Maxillary Prominences (Figs. 10.14 & 10.15) 
- Each maxillary prominence proliferates and grows medially. 
- The growing maxillary prominence pushes the medial nasal prominence towards the 

midline until both medial nasal prominences fuse together forming the intermaxillary 
segment at the tip of the frontonasal prominence. The intermaxillary segment gives 3 
derivatives: 
1. Labial component-» the philtrum of upper lip. 
2. Jaw component => the part of upper jaw that carries the 4 incisor teeth. 
3. Palatal component = 1% palate. 

- Each maxillary prominence is initially separated from the corresponding lateral nasal 
prominence by a naso-lacrimal groove. The ectoderm between them gives rise to a 
solid cellular rod, which becomes canalized to form the naso-lacrimal duct. [ts caudal 
end opens into the lateral nasal wall while its cranial end expands to form the lacrimal 
sac. Later, union between the maxillary prominence and the lateral nasal prominence 
establishes continuity of the surface between the nose and cheek. 

523 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Lateral nasal prominence 

Maxillary prominence $= 

Mandibular prominence = Nasolacnmal | 
groove 

A B 
Fig. 10.14: Frontal view of the face- A) 7 wks, B) 10 wks 

Notice: 
The upper lip has 3 sources: the 2 lateral parts are derived from the maxillary prominences 
while the philtrum is derived from the frontonasal prominence (The fused medial nasal folds 
— the intermaxillary segment). | 

Maxilla with 
4 incisor teeth 

Intermaxillary segment 

Fused 
palatal 
plates 

Fig. 10.15: Derivatives of the intermaxillary segment 

lll. The Two Mandibular Prominences 
- Are actually the 1st pharyngeal arches 
- They grow in a medial direction and fuse together in the midline forming the lower lip. 
- The wide primitive mouth (or stomodeal fissure) is progressively reduced by fusion 

between the adjacent surfaces of the mandibular and maxillary prominences. This 
proceeds from lateral to medial. 

Anomalies: 
1. Oblique facial cleft: failure of fusion between the maxillary 

prominence and the lateral nasal prominence. The naso- 
lacrimal duct persists as an open furrow, usually associated with 
cleft lip on the same side. (Fig. 10.16) 

2. Macrostomia (largemouth) or microstomia (small mouth) due ak a 

to little or excessive fusion between the mandibular and  Fig-10.16: Oblique 
maxillary prominences. facial cleft 

3. Rare midline anomalies: i.e. median cleft lip (true hare lip), cleft nose and cleft lower 
jaw. More common are minor degrees of cleft chin and micrognathia 
(underdevelopment of the lower jaw). 

524 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

; 

ga = Primitive node 

J 
Prmitive streak 

Fig. 10.18: Formation of the neural tube - Dorsal view 

Histogenesis of the neural tube (Fig. 10.19) 

a At first, the wall of the neural tube is a single layer of columnar neuroepithelial cells 
between outer & inner limiting membranes. The cells proliferate & form a pseudo stratified 
neuroepithelium differentiated into three zones: 
1. Inner ependymal (germinal) zone = lining of central canal & ventricles. 
2. Intermediate mantle zone —= gray matter. 
3. Outer marginal zone devoid of cell bodies < white matter. 

QO The cells in the mantle zone are differentiated into two types: 
a. Neuroblasts (= young nerve cells) 
b. Gliablasts (or spongioblasts = young neuroglia cells). They differentiate into 2 types of 

glial cells: 
1. Astrocytes: found mainly in the grey matter & form the supporting connective 

tissue between neurons 
2. Oligodendroglia: found mainly in the white matter & are responsible for 

myelination of nerve fibers within the CNS. 
N.B: The 3" type of glia cells called microglia migrate into the developing neural tube with 
the invading blood vessels; they are mesodermal & are believed to be derived from 
monocytes. 

QO After the neuroepithelial cells stop producing migrating neuroblasts & gliablasts the 
remaining cells become ependymal cells. 

526



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Neuroepithalium 
(neuroectodenm) 

Neural tube 

J 

@ a 
Apolar neuroblast Ghoblast (spongoblast) 

Bipolat neucobiast 

_e 

Protoplasmic asirocyle 

axon 

Fig. 10.19: Histogenesis of cells of the CNS 

0 The elongating axons of neuroblasts invade the marginal layer which becomes white 
matter. The 1% axons to invade are the short intersegmental fibers. Other axons form tracts 
which reach specific destinations within the CNS. Some axons project outside the neural 
tube forming motor nerves (somatomotor to skeletal muscles & visceromotor or 
autonomic preganglionic). 

0 Myelination of nerve fibers 
- starts in the 4" month and is not completed till the 2" year after birth. 
- Myelination of motor fibers occurs earlier than sensory fibers. 
- Myelination in the CNS is by Oligodendroglia while outside the CNS is by Schwann 

cells (derived from the neural crest). 
11. 

Fate of the neural tube (Fig. 10.20) 
1. The lateral walls continue to increase in thickness, the tube becomes oval in outline and 

its canal becomes narrow, slit-like. The dorsal & ventral midline portions of the tube are 
devoid of mantle layer, i.e., ependymal & marginal layers only, forming a dorsal lamina 
(previously called roof plate) and a ventral lamina (previously called floor plate). These 
regions serve primarily as sites of crassing of commissural fibers between the right & left 
sides. 

EE —— " 
EE ISi e ili ET em. 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOQUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

2. Later, the canal becomes diamond-shaped in cross section due to appearance of a 
longitudinal sulcus limitans on each side. The part of mantle layer dorsal to it forms the 
dorsolateral lamina (previously called alar lamina) containing sensory neurons while the 
part ventral to it forms the ventrolateral lamina (previously called basal lamina) 
containing sensory neurons. The visceral (autonomic) neurons are located opposite the 
sulcus limitans. 

Mantle layer Dorsal median 
Roof plate . septum 

Marginal layer “NY Dorsal sensory hom 

Neuroepithelial Ventral fissure 
layer 

Fig.10.20: Fate of neural tube - Formation of the spinal cord 

Development of the Spinal Cord (Fig. 10.20 & 10.21) 

Q (tis derived from the caudal part of the neural tube. 
Q The histogenesis of the neural tube is already described. The following changes occur in 

the wall of the neural tube: 
- The diamond-shaped lumen becomes circular = the central canal. 
- The ependymal layer = the ciliated columnar lining of the central canal. 
- The mantle layer = the grey matter. 
- The marginal layer is invaded by ingrowing axons = the white matter. 
- The ventrolateral (basal) lamina @ the ventral horn of grey matter (motor). Nerve cells 

accumulate in the regions which innervate the limb buds forming the cervical & lumbar 
enlargements of the cord. 

- The dorsolateral (alar) lamina =» the dorsal horn of grey matter (sensory). 
- Neurons opposite the sulcus limitans —- the lateral horn (autonomic) in the 

thoracolumbar region (sympathetic) & in sacral regions (parasympathetic). 
- The posteromedian septum is formed by occlusion of the dorsal part of the central 

canal while the anteromedian fissure is formed by bulging of the two basal laminae 
more than the floor plate. 

528

wr WwW 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Dorsal sensory root 

Dorsal root ganglion 

Alar plate 
Dorsal hom 

Basal plate Ventral hom 

A ty B 
OQutgrowing motor axons , bE Ventral motor root 

Trunk of spinal nerve 

Fig. 10.21: Formation of the spinal nerves 

QO The roots of spinal nerve develop as follows: 
- The ventral root is derived from elongating axons of neurons in the basal lamina 

(motor) & opposite the sulcus limitans (autonomic). 
- The dorsal (sensory) root & the DRG are derived from the neural crest. 

Q Positional changes of the cord (Fig. 10.22): 
- In the 3" month of intrauterine life, the spinal cord fills the vertebral canal completely 

therefore the spinal nerves pass horizontally from their segments of origin to the 
intervertebral foramina. 

- Later, the vertebral canal & dura elongate faster than the neural tube thus the spinal 
nerves pass obliquely from their origin to the foramina of exit which gradually acquire 
lower positions. 

- At birth, the spinal cord ends opposite L3 vertebra. 
- In adults, it ends opposite the upper border of L2 vertebra. Below this point, the track 

of spinal cord regression is represented by the filum terminale. 

Birth 

Adult 

Fig. 10.22: Levels of termination of the spinal cord 

529 



CHAPTER X: IVIISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Congenital malformations of the spinal cord 
1. Rachischisis (Fig. 10.23) = failure of the neural tube to close. 

Fig. 10.23: Rachischisis 

2. Spina bifida: (Fig. 10.24) (1:1000 of population) = failure of the dorsal portions of the 
vertebrae to fuse together leaving a midline defect usually at L5-S1. There are 2 types: 
** Spina bifida occulta: asymptomatic; may be marked externally by a tuft of hair. 
*¢ Spina bifida cystica: much more serious. May be: 

- Meningiocele = the meninges covered by skin bulge through the defect. 
- Meningiomyelocele: the meninges, spinal cord, and nerves bulge; 75% of all Spina 

bifida cystica are of this type; usually associated with hydrocephalus. 
- Myeloschisis or Rachischisis = the neural tube is not closed, and nervous tissue is 
exposed to the surface. In the brain the condition is called anencephaly. Neural 
tube defects are detected by increased alpha fetoprotein during amniocentesis. 

Unfused vertebral Tuft of has 

Dura mater 

Displaced spinal cord ( 

Roots of spinal nerve 

Subarachnoid spacs 

Spinal ganglion 

Fig. 10.24: Various types of Spina bifida and the commonly associated anomalies 

530



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Development of the Brain 

It is derived from the cranial part of the neural tube. 

I. Brain vesicles: (Fig. 10.25) 
Three primary brain vesicles develop = 5 secondary vesicles = adult derivatives. 

Table 10.3: primary vesicles and their derivatives 

1ry vesicles 2ry vesicles Derivatives Cavity 
Cerebral 

Telencephalon lateral ventricles 
) hemispheres 

Forebrain | Thalamus, 
(Prosencephalon) 

hypothalamus, ; ; 
Diencephalon : Third ventricle 

fis epithalamus, 
SRE ny subthalamus 

Midbrain a Cerebral 
FE] Mesencephalon Midbrain 

(Mesencephalon) aqueduct 

~Hindbrain Metencephalon Pons fourth ventricle 
~~ (Rhombencephalon) Myelencephalon Medulla 

Adult Derivatives 
8 SScoaaary CNS ventricles 

aencaphsalo Cexmbral Leieral 
3 primary Fela pg npn is SN ventricles 
vesicles FS Third 
Foretirain 2 Diencephalon ; Lod Thatamus ventricla 

Midbrain Mesercephalon LE }  Midbrain ma, 

FnGbran 7 Metencephalon hii Hai 
\ : ict 

Spinal cord 'Myselercephalon = | Medulla ventrice 

Spinal cord Cental 

 — Neaeuraltube 

Fig.10.25: Brain vesicles and their adult derivatives 

Il. Brain Flexures: (Fig. 10.26) 
As the result of unequal growth of the different parts of the brain 3 flexures are 
formed and the brain becomes bent in a zigzag fashion. 
1. The two earliest flexures are concave ventrally and are associated with the 

development of the head fold. These are 
a. The cephalic flexure between the forebrain and midbrain 
b. The cervical flexure at the junction of the hindbrain and spinal cord. 

2. A third flexure called the pontine flexure develops in the region of the future pons. its 
development is responsible for the formation of the 4" ventricle. It differs from the 
other two in that: 

Its convexity is forward 
It does not affect the head. 

531 



CHAPTER X: | MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Pontine  Metencephalon [ | 
flexure ; fl 

\ renee Ba Myelencephalon >a ) 7 - 

jo | 15 

Mesencephalon.-— / ) 
I 
\ 

Cervical LE 
flexure a Diencephalon 

Fig.10.26: Brain flexures 

The Hind-Brain Vesicle (Rhombencephalon) (Fig. 10.27) 
QO At first, the hind-brain vesicle consists of two lateral walls, connected across the midline 

by floor- and roof-plates. Each lateral wall consists of an alar and a basal lamina, separated 
by the sulcus limitans. 

a The following changes occur: 
1. The cavity dilates forming the 4" ventricle and the lateral walls rotate around the axis 

of the floor plate like opening a book. In this way, the basal lamina becomes medial & 
the alar lamina becomes lateral. 

2. The remains of the sulcus limitans are seen in the adult brain on the floor of the 4% 
ventricle. 

Extemal granular layer 
4th ventricle Roof plate 

Somatic allarent 

Special visceral 
afferent 

Ganeral visceral 
afferent 

Pontine nucle 

Somalic efferent (VI) Speciial l vivi sceral eff erent (V and vii Vii) 

Fig. 10.27 development of open part of medulla 

(J The Basal lamina = motor nuclei in 3 columns, from medial to lateral: 
1. General somatic efferent (GSE or somatomotor column) to muscles derived from 

myotomes. 
2. Special visceral efferent (SVE or branchiomotor column) to muscles derived from the 

pharyngeal arches. 

532 

a 

Spinal cord 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

3. General visceral efferent (GVE or visceromotor parasympathetic column). 
( The Alar lamina => sensory nuclei in 3 columns, from medial to lateral: 
1. General visceral afferent (GVA) column: receives general sensations from viscera and 

represented by the solitary nucleus. 
2. Special visceral afferent (SVA) column: Represented by the solitary nucleus, this receives 

taste sensations 
3. General somatic afferent (GSA) column receives general sensations from somatic 

structures. 
4. Special somatic afferent (SSA): represented by the four vestibular nuclei (equilibrium) & the 

two cochlear nuclei (hearing). 

Development of the Cerebellum 
0 Develops as 2 dorsolateral outgrowths of the alar lamina of the metencephalon called 

rhombic lips which fuse across the midline forming the vermis (Fig. 10.28). 
0 Originally, the 3 basic layers (ependyma, mantle & marginal) are arranged in this order 

within cerebellum. Later, some cells from the mantle layer migrate to the surface => the 
cerebellar cortex, the remaining cells => the cerebellar nuclei (Fig. 10.29) 

Q At first, the surface is smooth. The earliest fissure to appear is the posterolateral fissure 
which separates the Flocculonodular lobe (Archicerebellum) from the corpus cerebelli. The 
second fissure to appear is the fissura prima which separates the anterior lobe 
(Paleocerebellum) from the posterior lobe (neocerebellum). 

Roof plate Cerebellar Cerebellum increasing 
Rhombic lip rudimant ~~ insize 

A 

A ina Fig. 10.28: Development of 
of melencephalon on Ta 

cerebellum from rhombic lips 
Cerabellar rudiments grow 
medially in the roof plate to 
meet in the middle line 

Lateral 
hemisphere 

Roof plais of 41h veninde  MTSensephalon Grown ; grammar Loyor 

Marginal Uryer 
| : “ 

J 

Me sencephalon 

Mantle layer Purine celis 
A 

MNeurcepathehial Layer 8 

i! carebealium 

Fig. 10.29: Development otf he 

cerebellum 

A) 8 wks, B) 12 wks, 

C) 13 wks, D) 15 wks 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

The Mid-Brain Vesicle (Mesencephalon) (Fig. 10.30) 
OQ Its cavity is the cerebral aqueduct. 
QO The alar lamina —- the tectum which is divided by a longitudinal groove into corpora 

bigemina and by a transverse groove into corpora quadrigemina (colliculi). 
a The basal lamina 

1. its marginal layer = crus cerebri. 
2. Its mantle layer = 2 columns of motor nuclei: 

a. GSE column - the motor oculomotor nucleus 
b. GVE column -> the Edinger-Westphal nucleus 

Stratified nuclear 
layer of colliculus 

Sulcus 
limitans Visceral 

efferent 

*\\ Somatic efferent 
& \ (Hand iV) 

Substantia cerebri 
Basal plate 

nigra 

Fig. 10.30: Development of midbrain 

The Fore-Brain Vesicle (Prosencephalon) 

0 Consists of two lateral out pockets (cerebral hemispheres) which appear in the 5%" week 
and a median telencephalon. The cavities of the hemispheres (lateral ventricles) 
communicate with the 3™ ventricle through the interventricular foramen of Monro. (Fig. 
10.31) 

Developing right 
cerebral hemisphere 

Ependymal roof of Cerebral hemisphere Lamina terminalis interventricular 
tha di 

A ee Diencephalon 

Ependymal roof of third ventricle 

Fig. 10.31: Development of the cerebral hemispheres 

534

wT 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Telencephalon (Cerebral Hemispheres) 
1. The original occipital pole curves forwards to form the temporal pole and a new 

occipital pole is formed. A hidden depression called lateral cerebral fossa <the insula. 
(Fig. 10.32) 

2. Some neuroblasts of the mantle layer migrate to the surface ~-» the cerebral cortex. 
And the remaining cells > the corpus striatum. Axons descending from the cortical 
neurons (the internal capsule) penetrate the corpus striatum dividing it into caudate 
nucleus (dorsomedially) & lentiform nucleus (ventrolaterally). 

3. Due to growth of the cortex, the smooth surface of the hemisphere starts to show sulci 
& gyri beginning from the 3rd month. (Fig. 10.33) 

4. The neural cavity becomes the ventricles which are lined by ependyma. At certain sites, 
the ependyma of the roof of the ventricle and the pia mater are invaded by blood 
vessels to form the choroid plexus which forms the CSF. (Fig. 10.34) 

5. Three groups of commissural axons invade the lamina terminalis to reach the opposite 
hemisphere including; anterior commissure, hippocampal commissure & corpus 
callosum. Three other commissures develop outside the lamina terminalis including; 
the posterior commissure, habenular commissure & optic chiasma. 

Midoreln 
(hidden) Carebrum 

Forebrain ~~ Midbrain 

_~Hindbrain 

pr Cerebellum 

Spinal cord 

5 weeks 13 weeks Medulla 

At birth 

Fig. 10.32: Development of the insula 

a



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANQUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Precentral gyrus ~~ ~Snal sulcus 
Parietal Postcentral 
lobe gyrus 

insula 
Occipital 

lobe 

Olfactory arebellum 

bulb Temporal 
{ A lobe BH 

\ Fig. 10.33: Development of sulci and gyri of the cerebrum-lateral view 

A} 7 ms, B)9ms 

Choroid plexus 

interventricudar 
foramen 

Lateral 
ventricle 

striatum 

Thalamus 

~ Hypothalamus 
Ependymal roof Third ventricle 
of third ventricle 

Ih Cerebral cortex 

Projection fibers of 
internal capsule 

Lentiiorm nucleus 

Hypothalamus Plane of subsequent fusion 

Fig. 10.34: Development of corpus striatum & choroid plexus of lateral ventricle 

536



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOQUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Congenital malformations of the brain (Fig. 10.35 & Fig. 10.36) 

. Skull defect through which the brain/meninges herniate; mostly seen in the occipital bone 
. Cranial Meningiocele = herniation of the meninges 
. Meningeoencephalocele = herniation of both meninges and brain. 
Meningohydroencephalocele = herniation of the meninges, brain and ventricles. 

. Microcephaly = small skull due to impaired growth of the brain. 

. Anencephaly = exposed, protruding brain due to failure of the anterior neuropore to close; 
in most cases, the hindbrain remains intact. It causes hydramnios & is incompatible with life. 

4. Hydrocephalus = enlargement of the ventricles due to overproduction or obstruction to the 
flow of CSF as in congenital stenosis of the aqueduct or the foramina of the 4th ventricle. 

5. Agenesis of the corpus callosum or cerebellum. 
6. Mental retardation: Teratogens known to affect the nervous system include radiation, 

alcohol, viruses, and toxoplasmosis. 

Oefect in cranium at foramen magnum 

m— Arachnoid matar 

Defect al poslerior fontanelle of cranium 

Fig. 10.35: B) Meningiocele, C) Meningeoencephalocele, 
D) Meningohydroencephalocele 

Anencephaly 

Fig. 10.36: Congenital malformations of the brain 
The neural crest: (Fig. 10.37) 

%\/*  Its cells are derived from the edges of the neural folds and migrate to give rise to most of 
the peripheral nervous system. 

*%* Its cells differentiate into many types: 
1. Neuroblasts => all ganglia 

337 

WNO DOO RB 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

Sensory ganglia = the dorsal root ganglia and the ganglia of cranial nerves V (semilunar), 
Vil {(Geniculate), IX (superior & inferior), and X (superior & inferior). The neuroblasts of the 
sensory ganglia send two processes: 
Central process: invades the neural tube, forming collectively the dorsal roots of spinal 
nerve or sensory roots of cranial nerves then terminate in the sensory nuclei of the alar 
lamina or ascend in the marginal layer forming tracts which terminate on higher centers. 

ii. Peripheral process: elongates peripherally to terminate on sensory receptors. The 
proximal parts of the two processes fuse together & the cells become pseudounipolar. 
Autonomic ganglia (sympathetic & parasympathetic). Their neuroblasts form the 
postganglionic neurons of the autonomic nervous system. 
Spongioblasts will give rise to the following: 
Schwann cells which migrate peripherally & wrap themselves around the axons forming 
the neurilemmal sheath which is responsible for myelination in the peripheral nervous 
system. 
Cells which migrate to surround the neural tube = the pia & arachnoid maters. 
N.B.: The dura mater is derived from the surrounding mesoderm. 

. Melanocytes: migrate to the dermis of skin. 

. Chromaffin cells will give the following: 
Adrenal medulla (N.B.; the adrenal cortex is mesodermal) 
Carotid body & paraganglia. 

. Skeletal elements = odontoblasts & cartilaginous elements of the branchial arches. 

wr. Suprarenal medulla 
(chromaffin celis) 

Fig. 10.37: Derivatives of the neural crest 

538 

a oo WwW 



CHAPTER X: MISCELEANOUS&EMBRIOLOGY 

References: 

Barrett K, Brooks H, Boitano S, Barman S. Ganong review of medical physiology, 
26" edition, McGraw-Hill; 2019. 
Ganong’s Review of Medical Physiology. (2019). Kim E. Barrett, Susan M. Barman, 
Heddwen L. Brooks and Jason Yuan. Twenty sixth edition. McGraw-Hill Education 
Guyton and Hall Textbook of Medical Physiology. (2021). John E. Hall and Michael 
E. Hall. Fourteenth edition. International edition. ELSEVIER 
Harper;s illusterated biochemistry, thirty second edition paperback-Illustrated, 30 
september 2022. 
Human Physiology: From Cells to Systems. (2019). Lauralee Sherwood and 
Christopher Ward. Fourth Canadian edition. Nelson Education Ltd. 
Katzung& Trevor’S pharmacology examination &board review, a Lang medical book 
twelvth edition 2019. 
Levinson, W.: Review of microbiology and immunology 16™ edition McGraw-Hill 
education 2020. 
Lippincott illustrated reviews: pharmacology eighth edition, 2022. 
Mescher AL. Junqueira’s Basic Histology text and atlas. 17" edition. McGraw-Hill 
11.C, 2021. 
Robbins and Kumar basic pathology 11™ edition 13 September 2022. 
Snell, Richard S, Splittgerber Ryan, : Snell’s clinical neuroanatomy (7%/8%). 
Philadelphia: Wolter;s Kluwer/Lippincott Williams &Wikins 2019 
Whalen K, Field C, Radhakrishnan R: Lippincott’s illustrated reviews pharmacology. 
7" edition. Philadelphia: Wolter Kluwer, 2019. 
http.//www.mentalhealth.org.uk/sites/default/files/2022-09/MHEF-Prevention-and- 
mental -health-report.pdf. 
hitps://www.mentalhealth.org. uk/sites/default/files/2022-09/MHF -Prevention- 
and-mental-health-report. pdf 

540 



eet TT = 

———— EE = —— ————" = =" hgh”. Ng, ——— ——= = WE ==

CHAPTER IX: NEURODEGENERATIVEEDEMYLANTING DISEASES 

DISEASES TRAUMA, VASCULAR DISORDER & TUMORS 

B Semantic memory represents general factual knowledge about the world and language, 

including memory for words and concepts. You know that Mount Everest is the world’s 

tallest peak. 

Non declarative: 

B® Procedural memory is reflected in skills and actions, like riding a bike. Done without 

reflection 

Bm Classically conditioned responses not consciously remembered 

Chemical basis of memory 

e Acetylcholine plays important role in encoding of new information and the formation of 

working memory 

e Dopamine plays an important role in consolidation of the working memory 

eo Norepinephrine is a neurotransmitter that is important for attentiveness, emotions, 

sleeping, dreaming, and learning. 

e GABA (gamma amino butyric acid) an inhibitory neurotransmitter. GABA acts like a 

brake to the excitatory neurotransmitters that lead to motor control, vision, and many 

other cortical functions. It also regulates anxiety. 

e Glutamate an excitatory relative of GABA. It is the most common neurotransmitter in 

the central nervous system - as much as half of all neurons in the brain - and is 

especially important regarding memory. 

Types of memory and its relation to neurotransmitter: 

B Working memory is our ability to absorb and retain new information and correlate it with 

older memories. If we are deficient in dopamine in our frontal lobe, our working memory 

will be overloaded, and we will dump older memories. 

B Immediate Memory: Immediate memory depends on acetylcholine in the parietal lobe. A 

deficiency here will affect our learning capacity and our basic alertness. It must transfer 

visual and auditory signals to long term memory within 30 seconds of receiving them. 

BW Verbal Memory: Verbal memory is associated with our temporal lobe. If we have 

insufficient GABA, we will have difficulty in producing and understanding sounds, words, 

sentences, and stories. 

BW Visual Memory: Visual memory is our ability to remember faces, colors, shapes, designs, 

surroundings, pictures, and symbols. It is a function of our occipital lobe and the 

neurotransmitter serotonin. 

498