CHUNK 30 FAILED AFTER 4 ATTEMPTS
ERROR: {"error":{"code":429,"message":"You exceeded your current quota, please check your plan and billing details. For more information on this error, head to: https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/rate-limits. To monitor your current usage, head to: https://ai.dev/rate-limit. \n* Quota exceeded for metric: generativelanguage.googleapis.com/generate_content_free_tier_requests, limit: 20, model: gemini-2.5-flash\nPlease retry in 27.934422898s.","status":"RESOURCE_EXHAUSTED","details":[{"@type":"type.googleapis.com/google.rpc.Help","links":[{"description":"Learn more about Gemini API quotas","url":"https://ai.google.dev/gemini-api/docs/rate-limits"}]},{"@type":"type.googleapis.com/google.rpc.QuotaFailure","violations":[{"quotaMetric":"generativelanguage.googleapis.com/generate_content_free_tier_requests","quotaId":"GenerateRequestsPerDayPerProjectPerModel-FreeTier","quotaDimensions":{"location":"global","model":"gemini-2.5-flash"},"quotaValue":"20"}]},{"@type":"type.googleapis.com/google.rpc.RetryInfo","retryDelay":"27s"}]}}

--- RAW TEXT ---
Part 8 
1. Enumerated 2 drugs used to control progress of Alzheimer diseases. Mention mechanism 
and adverse effects of one of them 
2. Fampridine: Mechanism, route and its role in multiple sclerosis 
3. Enumerate three disease modifying drugs (DMDs) used in multiple sclerosis. Mention 
mechanism of one of them 
4. List possible adverse effects of the drug used as first line therapy in MS as well as its 
route 
5. Mention mechanism and adverse effects of Fingolimod 
6. Enumerate possible adverse effects of Natalizumab. 
7. Outline mechanism of action of natalizumab 
8. Riluzole is used to improve survival time and delay need for ventilator in lateral 
sclerosis. Outline its mechanism of action 
 
 
 Part 9 
1. Enumerate therapeutic uses of antipsychotics with examples 
2. Adverse effects of clozapine 
3. Advantages of aripiprazole ( ب ها تكت  special & general) 
4. Enumerate 2 antipsychotic drugs suitable to manage psychosis in Parkinson disease 
5. Outline adverse effects of Risperidone 
6. Mention advantages of Atypical (New G.)  over typical (Old G,) antipsychotics 
7. Explain why Haloperidol is preferred than thioridazine in elderly cardiac patients 
8. Outline advantages of typical antipsychotics 
9. Enumerate possible extrapyramidal adverse effects of antipsychotics 
10. Discuss neuroleptic malignant syndrome (mechanism & management) 
11.  Advantages and disadvantages of adding benztropine with antipsychotics  
12.  Outline autonomic adverse effects of antipsychotics 
13.  List 2 antipsychotic drugs that may induce QT syndrome 
14.  List one typical and one atypical antipsychotics. Mention difference between them in 
the mechanism of action. 
15.  Outline drugs used in treatment of different periods of  bipolar depression 
16.  Explain why antipsychotic drugs are added to lithium in the beginning of therapy of 
manic phase of bipolar manic depression 
17.  Mention 1st line treatment of bipolar depression 
18.  Enumerate therapeutic uses of lithium carbonate 
19.  Discuss role of lithium carbonate in bipolar depression 
20.  Outline adverse effects of lithium carbonate 
21. Outline precautions that should be taken during long term use of lithium carbonate 
22.  Mention lines of management of lithium toxicity  
23.  Outline management of alcohol abuse 
 
 
24.  mechanism and use of acamprosate 
25.  Outline management of nicotine abuse 
26. Mention mechanism of two drugs used in management of nicotine abuse (smoking) 
27.  Discuss role of varenicline is management of nicotine abuse 
28.  Enumerate drugs that can be used to in cannabis abuse 
 
 Essay Questions  
CNS Module 
Short Essays Questions CNS 
Brain Fuels 
1. Mention three different types of brain fuels 
2. Compare in three points between the metabolism in neurons and astrocytes. 
3. Why neurons make Slower glycolytic rate than astrocytes “Mention one cause” 
Neurotransmitters 
1. Mention three examples of monoamines act as neurotransmitters. 
2. Illustrate the rate limiting reaction of GABA synthesis and mention the name of vitamin 
needed in synthesis. 
3. Illustrate the rate limiting reaction of catecholamine synthesis and mention its regulation. 
4. Mention the name of two enzymes used in catecholamine catabolism and mention the 
name of end product of epinephrine catabolism 
5. Give a short account on mechanism of action of α-methyl dopa. 
6. Name the tumor marker of pheochromocytoma. 
7. Name the tumor marker of carcinoid tumor “argintaffinoma”. 
8. Mention three causes of melatonin deficiency. 
9. Name the amino acids and coenzymes needed in serotonin synthesis 
10. Name the amino acids, enzymes and coenzymes needed in Histamine synthesis 
11. Name the amino acids, enzymes and coenzymes needed in NO synthesis 
Sources of ammonia 
1. Mention two examples of purely ketogenic amino acids, and two examples of mixed. 
2. Illustrate a biochemical reaction of transamination and mention the coenzyme needed. 
3. Illustrate a biochemical reaction of L- glutamate dehydrogenase and mention the 
coenzyme needed and regulation. 
4. Illustrate a biochemical reaction of non-oxidative deamination. 
5. Illustrate two biochemical reactions that produce ammonia 
6. Mention three different sources of ammonia. 
Urea cycle and Hyperammonemia 
1. Illustrate how ammonia is eliminated by the brain. 
2. Illustrate the rate limiting step of urea cycle and its regulation. 
3. Mention two relationships between urea cycle and citric acid cycle. 
4. Why increase ammonia is very toxic to brain “mention two causes” 
Inborn errors of AAs Metabolism 
1. A patient shows mental retardation due to increase one of essential aromatic amino acids , 
that cause defect of catecholamine synthesis. 
a) Mention the name of this disease and what is the cause? 
b) What are the other symptoms of this patient? 
c) Illustrate the reaction of degradation of this Amino acid. 
d) Mention the name of two toxic compounds that is increased in this case. 
2. Name the defective enzyme in maple syrup disease. 
Vitamins deficiency 
1. Mention the name of three biochemical reactions need vitamin B1. 
2. Mention two Biochemical tests of thiamine status 
3. Illustrate the biochemical reaction of pyruvate dehydrogenase. 
4. Mention the name of two diseases from thiamine deficiency. 
5. Mention three causes and three symptoms of pellagra “niacin deficiency” 
6. Give a short account on two folate analogues “antagonists”. 
One Carbon Units 
1. Mention two different sources and two fates of methylene. 
2. Mention two different sources of methenyl and formyl. 
1Glucose
2 KetonebodiesacetoacetateBOHButyrateStarvation
3 MonoCarboxylicacid lactate
HMPPathwayyDPH
Neurons Astrocytes
GUTS GluT1
I Aerobic 38ATE Anaerobic 2ATE Lactate
X storeglycogen
LDHI LDHS
duetoabsenceof6POFructokinase1Fuctose26Bisphosphatase.s inneurons
It synthesizeuse26Bi5phosphteT_ Potidor ofPFEIL
1 CatecholaminesDopamineNorepinephrineEpinephrine sin
2 Indolamines SerotoninMelatonin Typtophan
3 Histamines Histidine
GAD CO2 Ghtamiracid
Glutamate decarboxylaseÉGammaaminoButyricacid
IPO GABA
Vitaminneededis VitaminByPyridoxineAcePyridoxalPO
e
Brain Fuels
Neurotransmitters 
Tyrosine
Tyrsinehydroxylase Dopa Dihydroxyphenylalanine I
OzetetrahydroBiopterin DihydroBiopterinHe
Regulation FeedbackinhibitionbyCatecholaminesDotamineNorepinephrine
allosteric Epinephrine
MonoamineoxidaseMAO Catechol.OMethyltransferaseCOMT
EpinephrineConvertedto LanillylmandedCMA orNorEPi
It is a competitiveinhibitorofDOPAdecarboxylaseenzyme SimilarAnalog toDOPA
usedas antihypertensive
increasevaniylmandelicaa.tw inwin
Serotonin
increase 5 hydroyinddaet.ca HtMAo
CigarettesCafeineStressAntidepressant BBlockers9Age
5OHTryptamine
Imagine better in inhyltionsPIPOindecarboxy
Aminoacid Histidine
Enzyme Histidinedecarboxylase
Coenzyme PyridoxalPOPLD
tarot
Aminoacid Arginine
Enzyme NitricoxideSynthase Nos
Coenzyme NADPH
GhigfB
2Lketogenic lysine Leucine
sang It phenylalaninetyrosineTryptophanIsoleucinethreonine
Aspartate
Alanine aketogitaÉÉ son pglige Glutamate
PLO
Enzyme Alaninetransaminase Coenzyme PyridoxalPOPIPO
glutamate Iwamatedehydrated ketoglutarate sÉg la
NADAHO NADAH NH3
CoenzymesYAI in oxidativedeamination
inreductiveamination
Regulation allostericstimulatedbyADPGDP
allosteric inhibitedby ATPGTPANADH
o
Glutamine flutaminase ypgGlutamate
Sources of Ammonia 
IGlutamatedehydrogenaseSGlutaminase Seebefore
I Catabolismofaminoacids Transdeamination
2 CatabolismofPurine Pyrimidine
3 aminesbyMAO
4 uraseenzymebyintestinalbacteria
1Glutamate Glutamine
ketoglutarate Glutamatesynthetase
Glutaminey a r NH3 He 1,43 NADPH NADP Ffp
Carbamoyln synthetaseI.NH Co2 CarbamoylPOMI
AfpCPSULADPI Proteolysis Regulation
alongterm increaseactivitywithincreaseProteinindictsstarvation
bshortterm allostericactivatedbyNacetylghtgmg.tngsytfase
Kb
Sole
I Cozneeded ismostlyPorducedbyCitricacidcycleCAC
2 FumarateProducedbyureacycleConvertedtooxaloacetate inCAC
3 Asparticacidneed.inureaCycleCanbeProducedfromoxaloacetatebyAST
NH ASI 3ATPmoleave4ATPenergy
4ATPneededforureacycleCanbe ProducedfromCAC
Urea Cycle and Hyper ammonia 
I decrease aketoglutarate decreaseKrebs'sATPProduction
2 decreaseglutamate decreaseGABAformation
3 increasePermeabilityto knot interfereelectricactivity
4 increaseGlutamine osmoticshiftofwatercerebraledema
5 glutamine isexchangedéTryptophan
I a Phenylketonuria
Causes DeficiencyofPhenylalaninehydroxylaseClassic
Dihydrobiopterinreductase
x synthesis
1 b DePigmentationdecreasemelaninSynthesis
Badmousyodor
1 C PhenylalaninePfenyldaninehydroxylase
tyrosine
Oz tetrahydroBiopterin
IgtDihydroBiopterin
1 d PhenylPyruvatePhenyl lactatephenylacetate acidosis
deficiencyofbranchedchainaKetoaciddehydrogenaseComplex
increaseBranchedchainaminoacids alphaketoacids
Inborn errors of amino acids  
Vitamins Deficiency 
I
oxidativedecarboxylationof a Ketoacids
a Pyruvatedehydrogenase
branchedchain a ketoacidsdehydrogenase
3 0
2Transketolate in HMPPatway
3 decarboxylationofPyruvate inyeast
I
2 Thiamine Pyrophosphateeffect
Erythrocyte transketolase activityCETKA
3 Bloods urine Thiamine levels
4 Pyruvate lactatelevels
TPPE
Pyruvate
Its PAH
TRP
NAD liBieacid
FAD
acetyl CoA
NADH Coz
Beriberi
Polished rice
Wernicke Korsakoff syndrome alcoholics
Caf NiacinATyptophan deficiencyindiet e.g maize
Malabsorption ofTryptophan Hartnupdisease
3Ds Death
Vitamin By deficiency
CarcinoidTumor
8I
Dermatitis
Dementia
Diarrhea
1 PABA analogs Sulla drugs
Preventfolicacidsynthesisby bacteria antibiotics
I Competitiveinhibit dihydropeteroatesynthetase
2 Folicacidsanalogs Methotrexate
MTHF
Preventfolicacidactivation in human
Competitiveinhibitdihydrofolatereductase
anticancer
ÉÉ
One Carbon Units 
CHz
Sources I FromSerine
GlycinebySerinehydroxymethyltransferase
2 From glycinebyglycinecleavage complex
Fates 1 Convertedto metheny CH byoxidation
2
x methyl cts by reduction
x
3 Synthesis of TMP by Thymidylatesynthase
4 Synthesis of serine fromglycine
Sourcesofmetheny I from methylene by oxidationNADPdehydrogenase
2 From Histidine by Histidinase
Sourcesofformyl
DirectFrom FormylTHFSynthetase
2 Frommethenyl byhydrolysis
3 FromTryptophan

 
 
 
Anatomy Cases
Revised by Dr/  
AHMAD FARIED 
Head ………………………………….……….P.2  
Neck …………………………………………. P.8 
Neuro ……………………………………...….P.15 
Abdomen …………………………………….. P.21 
Pelvis ………………………………………… P.29 
Special embryology …………………………. P.32 
 
 
   اللهم إني أسألك فهم النبيين و حفظ المرسلين و المالئكة 
"  " المقربي
ناللهم اجعل ألسنتنا عامرة و قلوبنا بخشيتك و أسرارنا  
" " على كل شئ قدير بطاعتك إنك
 ." الهم ال علم لنا إال ما علمتنا إنك انت السميع العليم 
"
 
  
 
2 
 
Question 38 :A five-year-old child fell off his bicycle and his head hit the pavement. A 
2 cm long wound in his scalp was seen, but soon he was sitting in a pool of blood. 
 
 
Question 39 :A young man, while sucking a piece of lemon, noticed a painful swilling 
below the mandible with a small nodule related to the swilling. Examination revealed 
a stone in the right submandibular duct. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a. Why does a scalp wound bleed profusely?  
b. How can you stop the bleeding if you are away from the hospital?  
c. Name arteries supplying the scalp.   
d. Which is the dangerous layer of the scalp? Why is it dangerous? 
Answer 
a. A scalp wound bleed profusely 
Because - The CT septa is attached to the wall of the blood vessels  - The rich vascularity of the scalp. 
b. Bleeding can be stopped by compressing the wound. 
c. Arteries supplying the scalp - Supratrochlear artery. - Supraorbital artery. - Superficial temporal artery. - Posterior auricular artery. - Occipital artery. 
d. The dangerous layer of the scalpis the "loose CT" layer as its emissary veins can 
spread infections from the scalp to the cranial cavity. 
 
a. Where does the duct open in the mouth? 
b. Which nerve is intimately related to the duct? 
c. What is the nerve supply of the submandibular gland? 
d. Name structures related to the lateral surface of the superficial part of the gland. 
Answer 
HEAD 
  
 
3 
 
Question 40 :A 20-year-old student was playing baseball when the ball hit him on 
the side of the head. He immediately fell to the ground unconscious, but after about 
30 seconds he felt well and decided to sit and watch the match. An hour later, he felt 
so sleepy then he became unconscious. He was taken to the hospital. A skull X-ray 
showed a fracture in the region of the pterion. 
a. The duct opens bya narrow orifice on the summit of sublingual papilla at the side 
of frenulum of the tongue. 
b. The nerve related to the duct the lingual nerve hooks around it from the lateral 
to the medial side. 
c. The nerve supply of the submandibular gland is submandibular ganglion 
which convey to the gland: -sensory: from lingual nerve. -sympathetic: from plexus around facial artery. -parasympathetic: from chorda tympani. 
d. Structures related to the lateral surface of the superficial part of the gland. -Mandible. -Insertion of the medial pterygoid. -facial artery. 
 
a. Define the pterion. 
b. Why fractures in this region are extremely dangerous? 
Answer 
a. The pterion it's the thinnest part of the skull and liable to fracture( the meeting of 4 
bones –temporal – parietal – sphenoid – frontal ) 
b. Fractures in this region are dangerous as it may injure  the middle meningeal 
artery which, cause  extradural hemorrhage and cerebral compression. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 وَ ق ُلِ اعْمَل ُوا ف َسَيَرَى َّللاه ُ عَمَل َكُمْ وَرَسُول ُهُ
 وَ ال ْمُؤْ مِنُونَوَسَتُرَدُّونَ إ ِ ل َىٰ عَالِم ِ ال ْغَ يْبِ وَ الشههَادَةِ ف َ يُنَبِّئُكُمْ
  ب ِ مَا كُنْتُمْ تَعْمَل ُونَ
 
 
  
 
4 
 
Question 41 :During surgical removing of a tumor in the infratemporal fossa, an 
intense hemorrhage occurred. The surgeon clamped the main source of arterial 
supply to the area. 
Question 42 :A patient opened his mouth widely while yawing, after which he 
couldn't close his mouth. 
a. Which artery did the surgeon clamp to stop the hemorrhage? 
b. Name the main nerve located in the fossa and its branches. 
c. This patient complained of loss of taste, sensation from anterior part of the tongue 
after the operation. Can you account for this? Name the nucleus that receives taste 
sensation. 
Answer 
a. The artery clamped to stop thehemorrhageis the maxillary artery. 
b. The main nerve located in the fossais the mandibular nerve. 
Branches:  - From the trunk: nervous spinosus, nerve to medial pterygoid, tensor palate and 
tensor tympani. - From anterior division: buccal nerve, nerve to lateral pterygoid, nerve to 
masseter and nerve to temporalis. - From the posterior division:auriculotemporal nerve, lingual nerve and inferior 
alveolar nerve. (ALI) 
c. Loss of taste sensation due to affection of chorda tympani which joins the lingual 
nerve. -The nucleus that receives taste sensation is the nucleus solitaries. 
 
 
a. Name the joint affected and its type. 
b. List ligament of the joint which ligament is important right functionally?  
c. Mention the nerve supply of the joint.  
Answer 
a. The joint affected isT.M.J (tempromandibular joint)  
Type: synovial, bi-condylar  
b. Ligaments of the joint:  
1. Tempro-mandibular ligament “the important right functionally” 
2. stylo-mandibular ligament  
3. Spheno-mandibular ligament 
c. Nerve supply: Auriculotemporal& masseteric nerves. 
  
 
5 
 
Question 43 :A patient developed a benign swelling of the parotid gland (superficial 
lobe) the doctor decided to excise it 
Question 44 :A patient presented with a red, swollen and painful right eye. The 
movements of the right eye were painful and the pupil of that eye was fixed and 
dilated. CT scan showed thrombosis of the cavernous sinus. 
 
a. What is the most important structure that would the doctor take care of?  
b. Mention the distribution of its upper two branches 
c. Mention the cranial nerve carrying parasympathetic supply to the gland and the 
ganglion of relay  
Answer 
 
a. The most important structure is facial nerve because it is the most superficial 
structure in the gland. 
b. distribution of upper two branches of facial is: 
1. Temporal to frontal belly of occiptofrontalis m. &orbiculrisocculi. 
2. Zygomatic to orbicularis occuli m. 
c. Cranial n. carrying parasympathetic is glossopharyngeal (IX) &ganglion of relay 
is otic ganglia. 
 
a. Define the venous sinus and its function. 
b. Describe the site and contents of the cavernous sinus. 
c. Define the dangerous area of the face. Why this area is dangerous? 
d. Name the veins terminate in the cavernous sinus. 
Answer 
a. The venous sinus: - It's a large venous space lying in middle cranial fossa on either side of body of 
sphenoid bone, having 4 walls & 2 ends. It's called "cavernous" because of its 
spongy nature (formed of 2 layers of dura matter ) - It drains the orbit, brain, meninges and CSF 
b. The cavernous sinus:  
Site: in the middle cranial fossa, on each side of the hypophyseal fossa. 
Contents:  
Structures in the lateral wall of the sinus from above downwards: 
I- Oculomotor nerve. 
II- Trochlear nerve. 
III- Ophthalmic nerve. 
IV- maxillary nerve. 
  
 
6 
 
Question 45 :A young inexperienced doctor opened a parotid abscess by making a 
vertical incision, the patient became unable to raise the eyebrow on the operated 
side. - Structures passing through the sinus: ICA with its sympathetic plexus & the 
abducent nerve. 
c. The dangerous area of the face:  
It is a triangular area of facial skin including upper lip, nose and medial angle of the 
eye. If this area is infected the infection would spread from: 
_facial vein to the cavernous sinus by sup ophthalmic vein 
_ptrygoid plexus to the cavernous by Emissary vein 
 causing its thrombosis. This affects the cranial nerves III, IV and VI. 
d. The veins terminate in the cavernous sinus: - From the orbit:  
I- superior ophthalmic vein. 
II- inferior ophthalmic vein. 
III- central retinal vein. - From the brain:  
I-superficial middle cerebral vein. 
II- Inferior cerebral veins from the temporal lobe. - From the meninges:  
I- sphenoparietal sinus. 
III- frontal trunk of the middle meningeal vein.  
 
a. Which nerve was injured? Specifically, mention the branch that was cut. 
b. What could the doctor do to avoid the lesion? 
c. What are the structures present within the substance of the parotid gland?  
Mention how they enter and leave the gland. 
d. Mention the surface anatomy of the parotid duct. 
Answer 
a. The nerve injured: Temporal branch of facial n.  
b. The lesion could be avoided by making transverse incision & parallel to terminal 
branches of facial n.  
c. The structures present within the sunbstance of parotid: 
Facial n. (most superficial): enters through posteromedial surface & divides the 
gland to superficial & deep parts forming pes anserinus plexus & then divides to 5 
terminal branches: temporal, zygomatic, buccal, mandibular & cervical. 
  
 
7 
 
Retromandibular v.: formed inside the gland by union of maxillary & superficial 
temporal v. then divides into anterior & posterior divisions that leave the gland 
through its apex  
ECA (most deep): enters through posteromedial surface of the gland & divides at 
the level of neck of mandible into 2 terminal branches, maxillary & superficial 
temporal arteries 
Deep parotid L.N.: embedded within its substance 
d. The surface anatomy parotid duct: 
It lies 1 finger breadth below the zygomatic arch, it corresponds to middle 1/3 of a 
line drawn from the tragus of ear to a point midway between ala of nose & upper lip  
 
 
 
 
  
Hard work beats 
talent when talent 
doesn't work hard 
  
 
8 
 
Question 1:A 30 year-old woman complained of a swelling in the anterior part of 
her neck, nervousness and loss of weight. The doctor examined her and found an 
enlarged thyroid gland which moves up and down with swallowing. He suggested 
that a subtotal thyroidectomy (parietal removal of thyroid gland) had to be 
performed. 
 
 
a. Why do swellings of thyroid gland move up and down with swallowing? 
b. What important structures could be injured on operations of thyroid gland? 
c. Enumerate the main vessels supplying the thyroid gland. 
d. Give the course and distribution of glossopharyngeal nerve. 
 
Answer  
 
a. The swelling move up & down by swallowing because thyroid gland is 
surrounded by the pretracheal fascia which attaches the gland to trachea and larynx. 
b. Imporant structures could be injured: 
Internal jugular vein. 
Left brachiocephalic vein.  
External laryngeal nerve.  
Recurrent laryngeal nerve.  
c. Main vessels supplying thyroid: 
Superior thyroid arteries from ECA. 
Inferior thyroid arteries from 1st part of subclavian artery.  
In 3%: Thyroid ima artery from arch of aorta.  
2 superior & 2 middle thyroid veins which drain into IJV.  
2 inferior thyroid veins which drain into left brachiocephalic vein. 
d. Course: 
 The nerve emerges from the skull through the jugular foramen. 
 Then it passes between the IJV & ICA, then between the ICA & ECA, then on the 
lateral surface of Stylopharyngeus muscle then it enters the pharynx between the 
superior & middle constrictors.  
Distribution 
 Lingual branch: to posterior 1
3
 of tongue and circumvallate papillae.  
 Tonsillar branch: to palatine tonsils. 
 Carotid sinus and carotid body branches. 
NECK 
  
 
9 
 
Question 2:A 2 years old boy was brought to the hospital, his mother noticed 
abnormal position of his neck. The doctor noted that the neck was bent to the left 
side while the face looked to the right. 
Question 3:A 65-year-old man fell and lost his consciousness at the gate of a hospital. 
The doctor rushed and felt for pulse in front of the sternomastoid muscle. 
 Muscular branch to Stylopharyngeus muscle. 
 Pharyngeal branch to Oropharynx. 
 
a. Name this clinical condition. 
b. Which muscle is involved? Indicate the side affected? 
c. What is the nerve supply of this muscle? 
d.  Name another muscle supplied by the same nerve. 
Answer 
a. The clinical condition: Torticollis. 
b. Muscle involved: Sternomastoid, right side. 
c. Nerve supply: Spinal accessory nerve. 
d. Another muscle supplied by the same nerve: Trapezius. 
 
a. Which artery's pulse did he feel? 
b. From which aortic arch did this artery develop? 
c. At witch level in the neck does it divide into its terminal branches? 
d. What is the relation of the vein to the artery in the neck? 
e. Name one structure present at the bifurcation (termination) of the artery and 
mention its significance. 
Answer 
a. He feel the pulse of: The common carotid artery. 
b. This artery develop from the 3rd aortic arch. 
c. It divides into its terminal branchesat the upper boarder of thyroid cartilage (disc 
between C3-C4) 
d. The relation of the vein to the artery: 
The vein lies lateral to the artery in the neck. 
e. Structure present at the bifurcation: 
1. Carotid sinus, contains baro-receptors for controlling arterial blood pressure. 
2. Carotid bodies, act as chemo-receptors controlling O2 and CO2 contents of the 
blood. 
  
 
10 
 
Question 4:A 42-year-old woman came to the hospital with a swilling in the front of 
the neck. The swelling extended till the thyroid cartilage. It moved up and down with 
swallowing. This case was diagnosed as a thyroid swilling. Thyroidectomy was 
performed and two months later the patient returned to her doctor complaining of 
changes of her voice and frequently occurring cramps. 
 
a. Why does the swilling move up and down with swallowing? 
b. Explain the thyroid swilling can't extend up beyond oblique line of thyroid cartilage? 
c. Explain the changes in voice and the muscle cramps that this patient had following 
Thyroidectomy 
d. List two anomalies related to the development of the thyroid gland. 
Answer 
a. The swilling move up and down with swallowing because the swilling is invested 
by pretracheal layer of the deep fascia. 
b. Thyroid swilling can't extend up beyond oblique lineof thyroid cartilage: Due 
to attachment of infrahyoid (sternothyroid)  muscles. 
c. The changes in voice and the muscle cramps  
Due to injury of external laryngeal nerve (supplies cricothyroid muscle) during 
ligation of superior thyroid artery. Injury of recurrent laryngeal nerve which 
supplies other laryngeal muscles during ligation of inferior thyroid artery. Muscle 
cramps occur due to removal of the parathyroid glands during Thyroidectomy. 
d. Anomalies related to the development of the thyroidgland. 
1. Agenesis of the gland. 
2. Incomplete descent; the gland may be found at any point the base of the tongue 
and the trachea. 
3. Thyroglossal cyst. 
 
 
 
 
  طلب ُ العلم ِ فريضةٌ على كلِّ مسلم ٍ ، و "
 إنَّ طالب َ العلم ِ يستغْف ِر له كلُّ شىء ِ ،
  " حتى الحيتان فى البحر
  صححه األلبانى
 
  
 
11 
 
Question 5:An athlete used to lift heavy weights, suddenly developed weakness and 
coldness of his right upper limb. The condition diagnosed as hypertrophy of scalene 
muscles causing compression of an artery passing between these muscles. 
Question 6:An athlete that used to lift heavy weights suddenly developed severe pain 
in his neck and turn his face to the right side. 
Question 7:A female developed benign swelling of lower pole of left thyroid lobe. The 
doctor decided to excise the swelling surgically. 
a. Name the artery involved in this case. 
b. Mention structures passing between scalene muscle. 
Answer 
a. The artery involved in this case. 
The subclavian artery. 
b. Structures passing between scalene muscle. 
1. The subclavian artery. 
2. The brachial plexus. 
 
a. Name the affected muscles. 
b. Mention the nerve supply.  
c. Name the fascia enclosing this muscles.  
Answer 
a. The affected muscle: right Sternomastoid muscle. 
b. Nerve supply: 
Motor: spinal accessory nerve  
Sensory: ventral rami of C2 & C3  
c. Fascia enclosing the muscle: Investing cervical fascia. 
a. Name the artery that should be ligated during surgery. 
b. What is the nerve accompanying the above artery? 
c. What is supplied by the above nerve? 
d. If the nerve is cut, what will happen? 
Answer 
a. The artery should be ligated is: Inf. thyroid artery 
b. The nerve accompanying it is: The recurrent laryngeal n. (Branch of vagus) 
c. This nerve supply: 
Sensory to the mucosa below vocal cords 
Motor to the following muscles: 
1. Post. Cricoarytenoid 
  
 
12 
 
Question 8: A 30 years old lady visited her doctor complaining of headache & 
unilateral nasal discharge especially during night. The doctor noticed tenderness 
over the maxilla and after doing an X-ray to the head & neck, he told her she had 
sinusitis. 
2. Lat. Cricoarytenoid 
3. Thyroarytenoid 
4. Aryepiglottic 
5. Thyoepiglottic 
6. Transverse arytenoid 
7. Oblique arytenoid 
d. If the nerve is cut: Paralysis of all larynx intrinsic muscles except cricothyroid 
causing voice changes and muscle cramps & loss of sensation in the mucosa below 
vocal cords. 
 
a. Which para nasal air sinus is affected? 
b. Why is it the most commonly affected para nasal sinus? 
c. Why is the discharge more at night? 
d. What is the nerve supply of the sinus? 
Answer 
a. Para nasal air sinus affected: Maxillary air sinus  
b. It is most commonly affected because its drainage is antigravity and discharge 
from frontal & anterior ethmoidal air sinus can pass to it.  
Another cause is that maxillary air sinus is closely related to teeth so spread of 
infection from tooth to the sinus may occur  
c.  Discharge more at night because at sleeping position the head is at perfect 
position to discharge from the sinus much easier. As the opening of maxillary sinus 
discharge is higher than its floor  
d. Nerve supply of maxillary air sinus is infraorbital & superior alveolar nerve   . 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Every great achievement was once considered impossible. 
 
  
 
13 
 
Question 9:A patient when asked to protrude his tongue outside the mouth cavity 
the doctor observed That the tip of tongue is directed to the left side the facial 
muscles as well as the rest of body muscles where normal . 
Question 10A 54 years old man presented with a tumor in the posterior cranial 
fossa. The neurologist wanted to check the integrity of the 9th , 10th and 11th cranial 
nerves. 
     a.  what is the diagnosis? 
     b.  Name the muscles responsible for protrusion of the tongue . 
     c.   Mention the lymphatic drainage of the tongue . 
Answer  
      a.  lesion in left hypoglossal nerve. 
      b. Genioglossus muscle . 
     c.• Tip of tongue bilaterally to submental L.N.s . 
           • Margins unilaterally & body bilaterally to  submandibular and upper deep   
               cervical L.N.s  
          • posterior 1/3 bilaterally to  upper deep cervical ( Jugulo-digastric and Jugulo-     
omohyoid). 
  a.   How can you test for integrity of vagus nerve ? 
  b.   Enumerate sensory branches of glossopharyngeal nerve.  
 c.    Name the muscle(s) supplied by the accessory nerve 
Answer 
a.   examine arches of palate and uvula , In lesion there is ipsilateral flattening of   
           arches and uvula pointing to the normal side. 
 b. 1) Tympanic branch: sensory to middle ear and auditory tube . 
2) Carotid branch: to carotid body and sinus . 
 3) pharyngeal branch: to pharynx  
4) Lingual branch: to posteriot 1/3 of tongue 
5) Tonsillar branch: to palatine tonsil and soft palate .  
 c.  1) Cranial accessory nerve: - muscles of palate, pharynx and larynx through pharyngeal and recurrent laryngeal 
branches of vagus 
2) Spinal accessory nerve: - Trapezius muscle. 
       -Sternomastoid muscle 
  
  
 
14 
 
Question 11:A 50-year old male started to complain from difficulty in swallowing 
few weeks ago. He had a computerized tomography scan (CT scan) on the neck done, 
it revealed the presence of a swelling (most likely cancer) near the jugular foramen. 
Question 12:During surgical removal of the thyroid gland , a ligature slipped from 
the superior thyroid artery . To stop the bleeding, the surgeon blindly compressed 
the artery with a forceps. Later the patient spoke with husky voice. 
 
a. In this patient, which nerves could be involved and lead to dysphagia?  
b. Which venous sinuses are endangered by the cancer?  
c. Describe the sensory and motor supply of the pharynx. 
Answer 
a. The nerves could lead to dysphagia are: - Cranial accessory nerve which join vagus nerve then form pharyngeal plexus to 
supply muscles of the pharynx. - Glossopharyngeal nerve would also be affected. 
b. Venous sinus endangered:Pharyngeal plexus of veins which ends in pterygoid 
venous plexus & IJV. 
c. Sensory supply of the pharynx: - Nasopharynx: maxillary nerve “pharyngeal branch of pterygopalatine 
ganglion” - Oropharynx: glossopharyngeal nerve “sensory branch that joins the 
pharyngeal plexus” - Laryngopharynx: vagus nerve “internal laryngeal branch of superior 
laryngeal nerve” 
Motor supply: by pharyngeal plexus that is formed of 