A. Control of the extra-pyramidal activities. 
B. Planning and programming of movements.  
C. Tonically increase muscle tone activity.  
D. The associated automatic subconscious movements. 
E. Inhibition of excess cortical activity  
2. In the nigrostriated lesion there is:  
A. Kinetic tremors.  
B. Lead pipe rigidity.  
C. Positive Babiniski sign.  
D. Rebound phenomenon.  
E. Spasticity 
3. A patient suffering from damage of basal ganglia 
may NOT show:  
A.  Static tremors.  
B. Hyperreflexia and clonus.  
C.  Shuffling gait.  
D. Degeneration of dopaminergic neurons. 
E. Hypokinesia in all movements  
4. Basal ganglia lesion may Not cause:  
A. Akinesia disorder.  
B. Mask face  
C. Cogwheel rigidity.  
D. Monotonous speech.  
E. Flaccidity 
5. Parkinson's disease:  
A. Is caused by a lesion in the substantia nigra.  
B. Is caused by lesion in the posteroventral nucleus of the 
thalamus.  
C. Is accompanied by kinetic tremors.  
D. Accompanied by clasp-knife rigidity. 
E. Accompanied by pendular jerks 
6. Which of the following is NOT a feature of 
Parkinsonism:  
A. A tremor at rest.  
B. A deficiency of dopamine in the substantia nigra.  
C. A clasp-knife type of spastic rigidity.  
D. Difficulty in initiating the voluntary movements. 
E. Normoreflexia  
7. Parkinson's disease is characterized by:  
A. Tremors that worsen by movements.  
B. Paralysis of one side of the body.  
C. Increase of dopamine in the substantia nigra.  
D. Lead-pipe rigidity. 
E. Clonus.  
8. Chorea:  
A. Is due to lesion in the substantia nigra.  
B. May be due to lesion in the internal capsule.  
C. Is associated with hypotonia.  
D. Is associated with exaggerated tendon jerk.  
E. Is associated with increased gamma activity 
9. Athetosis is associated with movement which is NOT:  
A. Spontaneous.  
B. Spasmodic.  
C. Twisting.  
D. Present at rest. 
E. Decreased by emotions 
10. 
Concerning the basal ganglia function, which is 
NOT true:  
A. Caudate nucleus plan the sequence of patterns of 
movement.  
B. Caudate nucleus modifies the timing of movements.  
C. Putamen helps execution of subconscious learned pattern of 
movement.  
D. Basal ganglia mainly increases the muscle tone.  
E. Basal ganglia prevent involuntary movements 
11. 
The neurotransmitter used by the axons of 
substantia nigra neurons which project to the 
caudate and putamen is :  
A. Acetylcholine.  
B. Serotonin.  
C. Dopamine.  
D. Norepinephrine 
E. Enkephalin. 
12. 
Regarding the cerebellum, which is NOT true:  
A. Cerebellum helps in planning and timing of voluntary 
movements.  
B. The cerebellum is stimulated by the motor cortex.  
C. The receptor activity of the spindles and Golgi tendons 
organs reaches the cerebellum through the spinocerebellar 
tract.  
D. The cerebellum has direct stimulatory effect on alpha 
motor neurons.  
E. The cerebellum predicts and plans for the successive 
movements 
13. 
The cerebellum is NOT involved in:  
A. The maintenance of posture.  
B. Continuous feedback of information even during action.  
C. The performance of rapid alternating movements.  
D. Coordination of movements. 
E. Neocerebellum decreases muscle tone.  
14. 
Which one of the following is NOT true 
regarding the cerebellum:  
A. Each cerebellar hemisphere controls movements of the 
ipsilateral muscles.  
B. Cerebellar ataxia is a sensory ataxia.  
C. Cerebellar lesions cause pendular knee jerks.  
D. The intention tremor associated with cerebellar disease is 
worsened by movement. 
E. The neocerebellar syndrome gait is zig-zag like.  
15. 
Concerning cerebellum:  
A. Each cerebellar hemisphere coordinates the contralateral 
muscles.  
B. Spinocerebellar tracts give rise to conscious recognition of 
joint position sense.  
C. Paleocerbellar is facilitatory to muscle tone.  
D. Neocerebellum helps planning of movements. 
E. Cerebellar ataxia is associated with spasticity. 
16. 
Which is NOT a function of the cerebellum 
includes:  
A. Stop the movement at the precise intended point.  
B. Prevents oscillation of movements.  
C. Planning and timing function.  
D. Predictive function. 
E. Inhibit excess cortical activity.  
17.  
Neocerebellar syndrome in humans is NOT 
characterized by:  
A. Hypotonia.  
B. Pendular knee jerk.  
C. Disturbance of balance  
D. Dysarthria. 
E. Static tremors.  
18. 
Adiadochokinesia:  
A. Is failure of the patient to perform rapid coordinate 
movements.  
B. Is due to lesion in caudate nucleus.  
C. Is due to lesion in subthalamus.  
D. Is due to lesion in vestibulocerebellum. 
E. Is associated with hypertonia  
19. 
The following is NOT a neurological feature of 
cerebellar lesion:  
A. Abnormal coordination tests.  
B. Rebound phenomenon.  
C. Dysdiadochokinesia.  
D. Shuffling gate. 
E. Kinetic tremors. 
20. 
Which sentence is NOT true about kinetic 
tremors:  
A. Occurs during rest.  
B. Is due to neocerebellar lesion.  
C. Is accompanied with hypotonia.  
D. Disappear during sleep. 
E. Associated with motor ataxia  
21. 
Neocerebellum syndrome is NOT associated 
with:  
A. Ataxia.  
B. Hypertonia.  
C. Inability to do complex movements.  
D. Rebound phenomenon. 
E. Decomposition of movements  
22. 
Neocerebellum disease is associated with:  
A. Shuffling gait.  
B. Zigzag gait.  
C. Stamping gait.  
D. Circumduction gate. 
E. Drunken gait  
23. 
A cerebellar lesion is most likely associated 
with severe loss of equilibrium and drunken gait 
when the lesion involves:  
A. The neocerebellum.  
B. Lateral zones of cerebellar hemisphere.  
C. Intermediate zone of cerebellar hemisphere.  
D. The flocculonodular lobe. 
E. The caudate nucleus  
24. 
The following is NOT a neurological feature of 
cerebellar lesion:  
A. Dysmetria.  
B. Lead-pipe rigidity.  
C. Dysdiadochokinesia.  
D. Rebound phenomenon. 
E. Inccordination of voluntary movements 
25. 
Spasticity is characterized by:  
A. Affecting all body muscles.  
B. Due to increase alpha and gamma cells activities.  
C. Occurs with basal ganglia lesion.  
D. Associated with static tremors. 
E. Is of clasp-knife nature. 
26. 
Rigidity is characterized by:  
A. Affecting antigravity muscles.  
B. Due to increase gamma cells activities.  
C. Occurs with UMNL lesion.  
D. Associated with static tremors. 
E. Associated with circumduction gait. 
27. 
Spasticity is characterized by:  
A. Associated with shuffling gait.  
B. Associated with normoreflexia.  
C. Is of Cog-wheel or lead pipe nature.  
D. Associated with clonus. 
E. Occur in parkinsonism. 
28. 
Motor ataxia is NOT characterized by:  
A. Zig zag gait.  
B. Staccato speech.  
C. Kinetic tremors.  
D. Normal coordination with opened eyes 
E. Cerebellar lesion. 
29. 
Sensory ataxia is characterized by:  
A. Stamping gait.  
B. Staccato speech.  
C. Kinetic tremors.  
D. Failure of coordination even with opened eyes 
E. Cerebellar lesion. 
Questions on all topics of the motor system 
30. 
Which of the following is true with respect to 
the corticospinal pathway: 
A. It must be intact to elicit a positive Babinski's sign. 
B. It synapses with gamma motor neurons in the spinal cord. 
C. Is mostly an ipsilateral pathway in the spinal cord. 
D. Is a multineuron pathway. 
31. 
Purkinji cells of the cerebellar cortex are 
excited by: 
A. Inputs from deep nuclei. 
B. Mossy fibers. 
C. Basket cells. 
D. Granule cells. 
32. 
A major function of the climbing fibers to 
cerebellar cortex is: 
A. Inhibiting Purkinji cells. 
B. Learning novel movement patterns. 
C. Recognizing emotional stimuli. 
D. Directly exciting alpha motor neurons. 
33. 
65 year-old man has been complaining of 
worsening tremors at rest and difficulty in walking. 
On examination he is expected to reveal: 
A. Muscular flaccidity. 
B. Frequent micturition. 
C. Normal tendon jerks. 
D. Lost superficial reflexes. 
34. 
Pre-motor cortex: 
A. Is found in the temporal cortex. 
B. Control movements as speech, eye and head movements. 
C. Facilitates the stretch reflex. 
D. Initiates fine skilled movements. 
35. 
The motor area 4 is: 
A. Located in the post central gyrus in the frontal lobe. 
B. Inhibitory to the muscle tone. 
C. Main site of origin of extrapyranidal tract. 
D. The main cortical area responsible for control of fine 
discrete movements  
36. 
lesion of motor area 6 causes: 
A. Increased muscle tone. 
B. Muscle paralysis. 
C. Lose of fine discrete movements. 
D. Positive Babeniski’s sign with dorsiflexion of the big toe. 
E. Inhibition of the grasp reflex. 
37. 
The extrapyramidal system: 
A. Originates from cortical areas only. 
B. About 90% of its descending fibers are crossed to the 
opposite side. 
C. Terminates at alpha & gamma neurons in the sp. cord & the 
cranial nuclei. 
D. Starts its function during the first year of life. 
E. Is inhibitory to the muscle tone. 
38. 
Neocerebellar lesions are associated with: 
A. Clasp-knife rigidity. 
B. Positive Romberg’s sign. 
C. Monotonus speech. 
D. Pendular knee jerk. 
39. 
Regarding the cerebellum, all the following are 
true except: 
A. Has no reverbrating circuits. 
B. Can initiate gross movements. 
C. Prevents overshooting of movements. 
D. Acts as a programmer. 
40. 
Parkinson’s disease is characterized by: 
A. Decreased dopamine in the globus pallidus. 
B. Normal ability to initiate movements. 
C. Muscle paralysis. 
D. Increased activity of α motor neurons. 
41. 
Compared to static tremors, intention tremors: 
A. Occurs during rest. 
B. Are accompanied by hypertonia. 
C. Are caused by loss of damping function of cerebellum. 
D. Are characteristic to basal ganglia lesion.  
42. 
Concerning the basal ganglia function: 
A. Caudate circuit helps execution of learned pattern of 
movement. 
B. Putamen circuit is important for cognitive control of 
voluntary movements. 
C. Caudate circuit terminates in motor area 4. 
D. Damage to caudate circuit results in loss of timing and 
scaling of movements. 
43. 
Rigidity of parkinsonism: 
A. Is similar to that of UMNL. 
B. Is more prominent in antigravity muscles. 
C. Occurs in agonist and antagonist muscles. 
D. Is mainly due to increased activity of gamma motor 
neurons. 
44. 
Parkinson,s disease causes: 
A. Muscle paralysis. 
B. Increased resistance throughout the range of movement. 
C. Increased facial movements during speech. 
D. Tremors, which are obvious during movements. 
45. 
Concerning the cerebellum: 
A. The lateral zone has servo-comparator function. 
B. Cerebellar lesion is associated with dysmetria. 
C. The cerebellar output fibers originate from Purkinje cells. 
D. Mossy fibers are involved in newly learned patterns of 
movements. 
46. 
in: 
Lesion in the left cerebellar hemisphere results 
A. Paralysis of voluntary movements on left side of the body. 
B. Tremors on right side of the body. 
C. Slow monotonus speech. 
D. Falling to the left side during walking. 
47. 
Motor ataxia is characterized by: 
A. Stamping gait. 
B. Positive Romberg’s sign. 
C. Normal speech. 
D. Kinetic tremor. 
48. 
Dysdiadochokinesia is associated with lesions 
of the: 
A. Premotor cortex 
B. Primary motor cortex 
C. Cerebellum 
D. Basal ganglia 
49. 
Regarding servocomparator function of the 
cerebellum: 
A. Cerebellum sends direct corrective messages to muscles. 
B. Cerebellum compares the intended plan of movement with 
the actual movement. 
C. Cerebellum receives feedback information from muscles 
through conscious proprioceptive receptors. 
D. Cerebellum receives a copy of plan of movement from 
basal ganglia. 
50. 
An 83-year-old man was referred to a medical 
centre with a history of difficulty in walking. During 
examination: he was unsteady on his feet, dysarthric, 
negative Romberg’s sign, and appearance of tremor 
during movement were observed. What is the most 
probable diagnosis for this patient? 
A. Motor ataxia 
B. Sensory ataxia 
C. Vestibular ataxia 
D. Hysterical ataxia. 
51. 
A musician has lost his ability to play the piano 
with no signs of muscle paralysis. What is the 
probable site of lesion? 
A. Area 4 
B. Area 8 
C. Area 1,2,3  
D. Area within premotor area (area 6) 
52. 
Spinal shock produces:- 
A. Automatic micturition 
B. Hypotension 
C. Positive Babinski sign 
D. Spasticity of the paralyzed muscles 
53. 
Brown-Sequard syndrome is characterized by: 
A. Loss of vibration sense on the same side below level of the 
lesion 
B. Loss of voluntary movements on the opposite side below 
the level of the lesion 
C. Loss of reflex movements on the opposite side at the level 
of the lesion 
D. Loss of pain sensation on the same side below the level of 
the lesion 
54. 
43 year old woman is evaluated in the hospital 
and is found to have multiple neurologic 
abnormalities from the level T 12 down. She has loss 
of vibration and proprioception on the left but these 
senses are present on the right side. She has absent 
pain and temperature sensation in the right side from 
T12 down. Motor power was lost in the left leg but 
normal motor strength in her right leg. 
What is the most likely cause of her neurologic 
symptoms? 
A. Complete spinal cord transection at upper thoracic 
segments. 
B. Complete spinal cord transection at lower thoracic 
segments. 
C. Hemisection on the left part of spinal cord 
D. Hemisection on the right part of spinal cord 
55. 
After falling down from a staircase, a young 
woman is found to have loss of voluntary movement 
on the right side of the body and loss of pain and 
temperature sensation on the left side below the mid
thoracic region. The probable site of lesion is: 
A. Transection of the right half of the spinal cord in the upper 
thoracic region  
B. Transection of the left side of the spinal cord in the upper 
thoracic region 
C. Transection of sensory and motor pathways on the right 
side of the pons  
D. Transection of the left half of the spinal cord in the lumbar 
region 
56. 
Upper motor neuron lesion shows the following 
except: 
A. Increased muscle tone of affected muscles. 
B. Positive Babinski's sign. 
C. Flaccidity of muscles affected. 
D. Exaggerated deep reflexes. 
57. 
Lesion in the right internal capsule (UMNL) 
would result in: 
A. Flaccid paralysis on the right Side of body. 
B. Spastic paralysis on the left Side of body. 
C. Spastic paralysis on the right Side of body. 
D. Loss of Babinski sign on both sides. 
58. 
Patient with cerebellar lesion complains of the 
following except: 
A. Difficulty in speech. 
B. Unsteady gait. 
C. Disturbed autonomic functions. 
D. Inability to adjust movement. 
59. 
Parkinson’s disease is characterized by: 
A. Decreased dopamine in the basal ganglia. 
B. Normal ability to initiate movements. 
C. Muscle paralysis. 
D. Intention (kinetic) tremors. 
60. 
Muscle tone:    
A. Fatigues rapidly. 
B. Is based on dynamic stretch reflex. 
C. Is decreased Or lost in lower motor neuron lesion. 
D. Is increased during sleep. 
61. 
When the sole is stroked firmly by a key: 
A. The big toe planter-flexes in a patient having an UMNL. 
B. The big toe dorsi-flexes in a patient with damaged area 6. 
C. The big toe dorsi-flexes in a patient having LMNL. 
D. The other toes show fanning in UMNL. 
62. 
Mass reflex: 
A. Has a pattern of rigidity of upper limbs. 
B. Has a pattern of massive lower limb flexion with emptying 
of rectum and bladder. 
C. Occurs immediately after spinal cord transcetion. 
D. Is elicited by in patients with basal ganglia lesions. 
63. 
Long-term effects of cord trans-section at T12 
include: 
A. Paralysis of urinary bladder muscle. 
B. Loss of tendon jerks in lower limbs. 
C. Hyperalgesia in lower limbs. 
D. Hypertonia and hyperreflexia in lower limbs. 
Model Answers 
1 C  21 B  41 C  61 D 
2 B  22 B  42 D  62 B 
3 B  23 D  43 C  63 D 
4 E  24 B  44 B    
5 A  25 E  45 B    
6 C  26 D  46 D    
7 D  27 D  47 D    
8 C  28 D  48 C    
9 E  29 A  49 B    
10 D  30 B  50 A    
11 C  31 B  51 D    
12 D  32 B  52 B    
13 E  33 C  53 A    
14 B  34 B  54 C    
15 D  35 D  55 A    
16 E  36 A  56 C    
17 E  37 E  57 B    
18 A  38 D  58 C    
19 D  39 B  59 A    
20 A  40 D  60 C    
 
Essay Questions 
1) Outline the basal ganglia nervous connections. 
2) Compare between caudate and putamen circuits of the basal ganglia. 
3) List the major neurotransmitters involved in basal ganglia functions. 
4) Describe the role of the direct and of the indirect basal ganglia-cortical 
pathways in control of cortical functions  
5) Explain the role of basal ganglia in control of voluntary movements. 
6) Explain the role of basal ganglia in control of muscle tone. 
7) Outline the functions of the basal ganglia. 
8) Describe the causes, manifestations and treatment of a nigro-striatal lesion. 
9) List the effects of lesions of caudate nucleus, subthalamic nucleus and 
globus pallidus of the basal ganglia. 
10) Outline the role of cerebellar climbing fibers in motor learning. 
11) Outline the role of cerebellar mossy fibers in modulation of voluntary 
movements. 
12) Describe the role of vestibulocerebellum in regulation of balance. 
Mention the effect of its lesion. 
13) Outline the role of spinocerebellum in coordination of voluntary 
movements. Mention the effect of its lesion. 
14) Outline the role of cerebrocerebellum in coordination of voluntary 
movements. 
15) Describe the role of the cerebellum in control of muscle tone and stretch 
reflex. 
16) Discuss cerebellar syndrome. 
17) Compare between the conditions of incoordination of voluntary 
movements in a non-paralyzed person. (Sensory and motor ataxia). 
18) List the different types and causes of abnormal gait. 
19) List the different types and causes of tremors. 
20) List the different types of involuntary movements, and mention the cause 
of each. 
21) Compare and contrast between the two clinical types of hypertonia 
(rigidity and spasticity). 
22) List the causes of hypotonia. 
23) Compare between decorticate and decerebrate postures. 


CNS (Motor) 
1. interruption of upper motor neuron pathways in the 
internal capsule would NOT lead to:  
A. Paralysis and loss of fine voluntary movements especially 
of the hand & fingers.  
B. Marked wasting of muscles.  
C. Loss of abdominal reflex.  
D. Positive Babniski sign.  
E. Hyperreflexia on the contralateral side. 
2. Clonus:  
A. Is a flexion withdrawal reflex:  
B. Occurs on the same side of the body after unilateral 
damage to the internal capsule.  
C. Can be elicited by sudden maintained stretch of a 
hypertonic muscle.  
D. Is present in muscles with lower motor neuron lesion. 
E. Is associated with marked muscle atrophy.  
3. UMN lesion is manifested by:  
A. Spastic paralysis.  
B. Fibrillations. 
C. Muscle wasting.  
D. Normal planter response.  
E. Ipsilateral localized paralysis. 
4. The signs of hemiplegia do NOT include:  
A. Clonus.  
B. Inability to move the eye.  
C. Spastic tone.  
D. Hyperactive deep reflexes. 
E. Circumduction gait.  
5. Which sentence is NOT true about clonus:  
A. Can be elicited by doing sudden maintained stretch of a 
hypertonic muscle. 
B. Occurs on the opposite side of the body after damage to 
internal capsule.  
C. Is rhythmic alternating cycles of stretch-inverse stretch 
reflexes.  
D. Is present in muscle with lower motor neuron lesion. 
E. Is a sure sign of UMNL.  
6. Which sentence is NOT true about LMN lesion:  
A. Loss of superficial reflexes but exaggerated deep reflexes.  
B. Loss of tone of affected muscle.  
C. Fasciculation of the affected muscle.  
D. Wasting of the affected muscle. 
E. Ipsilateral localized paralysis.  
7. In lower motor neuron disease, the subject may 
show:  
A. Muscle atrophy.  
B. Rigidity of muscles.  
C. Hyperactive reflexes.  
D. Clonus. 
E. Contralateral hemiplegia 
8. +ve Babinski sign is present in:  
A. UMNL 
B. Cerebellar lesion,  
C. Basal ganglia lesion.  
D. Complete section of a peripheral nerve. 
E. Syringomyelia  
9. The lower motor neuron lesion is NOT characterized 
by:  
A. Loss of voluntary movements.   
B. Lead-pipe rigidity.  
C. Fasciculation of the affected muscle.  
D. Marked atrophy of the affected muscles. 
E. Loss of all reflexes of the affected muscles.  
10. 
A person suffering from chronic UMNL lesion 
shows:  
A. Loss of muscle tone.  
B. Extensive paralysis of one side of the body.  
C. Muscle wasting in the early stages of the disease.  
D. Presence of shuffling gait.  
E. Fibrillations 
11. 
A LMN lesion:  
A. Can result from poliomyelitis.  
B. Is characterized by exaggerated deep reflexes.  
C. Leads to generalized effects on contralateral muscles.  
D. Is accompanied with clonus.  
E. Is associated with circumduction gait. 
12.  
In Hemiplegia affecting the right side of the 
body, which sentence is NOT true:  
A. Is characterized by spasticity of muscle on the right side of 
the body.  
B. Is usually accompanied by marked muscle wasting on the 
right side of the body.  
C. Is associated with increased tendon reflexes on the right 
side of the body.  
D. Can be due to bleeding in the left internal capsule. 
E. Is associated with +ve Babiniski sign in the right side.  
13. 
Lesion of the internal capsule results in:  
A. Spastic paralysis of the contralateral side of the body.  
B. Flaccid paralysis of both sides of the body.  
C. Clonus in muscles of the same side.  
D. Exaggerated tendon jerk on the same side of the lesion. 
E. Loss of muscle tone in the opposite side.  
14. 
Which of the following observation would 
suggest that an upper motor neuron lesion is 
present?  
A. Marked muscle atrophy.  
B. hyporeflexia.  
C. Spasticity.  
D. fasiculations. 
E. Localized paralysis. 
15. 
Motor apraxia:  
A. Is due to lesion in primary motor area 4.  
B. Is due to lesion in sensory area.  
C. Is accompanied with muscle paralysis.  
D. Is characterized by loss of memory of learned voluntary 
movements. 
E. Is associated with stamping gait.  
16. 
Hypertonia of UMN lesions is characterized by :- 
A. Increased inhibitory discharge from the premotor area 
B. Inhibition of pontine reticular formation 
C. Increased γ-motor neuron discharge 
D. Decreased muscle spindle discharge 
E. Cog-wheel rigidity. 
17. 
Spinal shock is due to:- 
A. Severe pain felt at the site of the lesion 
B. Severe hypotensive shock 
C. Interruption of the ascending sensory pathways 
D. Interruption of the descending facilitatory tracts 
E. Increase excitability of motor neurons. 
18. 
by:- 
The stage of spinal shock is NOT characterized 
A. Failure of spinal reflexes below the level of the lesion 
B. Loss of sensations from the body below the level of the 
lesion 
C. Loss of voluntary movement from the body below the level 
of the lesion 
D. Exaggerated tendon jerks below the level of the lesion 
E. Atonic bladder and rectum 
19. 
In humans the usual duration of the stage of 
spinal shock is :- 
A. From 2-6 hours 
B. From 2-6 days 
C. From 2-6 weeks 
D. From 2-6 months 
E. From 2- 6 minutes 
20. 
Failure of spinal reflexes during the stage of 
spinal shock causes :- 
A. Automatic micturition 
B. Hypotension 
C. +ve Babinski sign 
D. Spasticity of the paralyzed muscles 
E. Recovery of sensations. 
21. 
Complete transection of the spinal cord does 
NOT produce:- 
A. Permanent loss of all sensations below level of lesion 
B. Permanent loss of voluntary movements by muscles 
innervated by the cord below level of lesion 
C. Permanent loss of reflexes mediated by the cord below 
level of lesion 
D. Temporary loss of micturition reflexes 
E. Hypotension. 
22. 
Complete transection of the spinal cord did not 
affect arterial blood pressure when the lesion occurs 
at level of :- 
A. Mid-cervical segments 
B. Upper thoracic segments 
C. Lower thoracic segments 
D. Mid-lumbar segments 
E. Upper cervical 
23. 
The earliest spinal reflex that recovers after the 
stage of spinal; shock is:- 
A. The micturition reflex 
B. The scratch reflex 
C. The stretch reflex 
D. The flexor reflex 
E. Babinski sign 
24. 
Recovery of micturition reflexes following the 
stage of shock :- 
A. Is due to recovery of supraspinal facilitation to the 
micturition center in the sacral segments 
B. Is due to recovery of activity of the micturition center in 
the sacral segments 
C. Causes retention with overflow 
D. Causes normal micturition 
E. Causes emptying of bladder after filling 400 ml volume of 
urine 
25. 
Brown-Sequard syndrome is characterized by:- 
A. Loss of vibration sense on the same side below level of the 
lesion 
B. Loss of voluntary movements on the opposite side below 
the level of the lesion 
C. Loss of reflex movements on the same side below the level 
of the lesion 
D. Loss of pain sensation on the same side below the level of 
the lesion 
E. Loss of all sensations above the level and of lesion. 
26. 
Lesion of the dorsal column does NOT impair:  
A. Pain sensation.  
B. Vibration sense.  
C. Itch sensation.  
D. Thermal sensations.  
E. Voluntary movements 
27. 
Tabes dorsalis is NOT characterized by::  
A. Loss of sense of position.  
B. High steppage gait.  
C. Sensory ataxia  
D. Deafferenation of all reflexes of lower limb muscles. 
E. Early loss of pain sensation.  
28. 
Tabes doralis is:  
A. Due to virus infection of the posterior root ganglia:  
B. Accompanied with shuffling gait.  
C. Accompanied with loss of vestibular sensations.  
D. Is a central spinal cord lesion 
E. Accompanied with incoordination of voluntary movements.  
29. 
Which sentence is NOT true regarding 
syrinogomyelia:  
A. Fine touch is preserved.  
B. Is due to dilatation of the central canal  
C. There is dissociated sensory loss.  
D. Dorsal column sensations are not lost. 
E. There is unilateral loss of pain. 
30. 
Which sentence is NOT true regarding 
syrinogomyelia:  
A. May lead to damage of anterior horn of spinal cord.  
B. May lead to Horner’s syndrome. 
C. May lead to syringobulbia.  
D. Has a jacket distribution of pain and temperature loss. 
E. Associated with sensory ataxia. 
31. 
A subject suffers from right hemisection of the 
spinal cord shows:  
A. Upper motor neuron paralysis at the level of the 
hemisection.  
B. Loss of pain and temperature on the right side below the 
level of the section.  
C. Loss of fine touch and vibration sense on the left side 
below the level of the section.  
D. Loss of all sensations on the same side at the level of the 
section 
E. Loss of voluntary movements in both lower limbs  
32. 
Tabes dorsalis may early impair the following, 
EXCEPT:  
A. The ability to stand steadily with the eyes closed.  
B. Pain sensation.  
C. Vibration sensation.  
D. Kinesthetic sensations. 
E. Fine touch  
33. 
Which sentence is NOT true regarding thalamic 
syndrome:  
A. Fine sensations are lost on the opposite side of lesion.  
B. Crude sensations return after sometime.  
C.  There is 2ry hyperalgesia. 
D. Associated with ataxia. 
E. Proprioception is not lost.  
34. 
In tabes dorsalis, which sentence is NOT true:  
A. Ataxia is present.                    
B. Vibration is lost early.  
C. Pain is the last to be lost.           
D. Associated with damage of afferents of lower limb 
reflexes. 
E. The patient has a shuffling gait. 
Model Answers 
1 B  11 A  21 C  31 D 
2 C  12 B  22 D  32 B 
3 A  13 A  23 C  33 E 
4 B  14 C  24 B  34 E 
5 D  15 D  25 A    
6 A  16 C  26 E    
7 A  17 D  27 E    
8 A  18 D  28 E    
9 B  19 C  29 E    
10 B  20 B  30 E    
 
Essay Questions 
1) List the causes and describe the effects of lower motor neuron lesion 
2) List the causes and describe the effects of chronic upper motor neuron 
lesion. 
3) Compare between the effects of lower motor neuron lesion with that of 
chronic upper motor neuron lesion. 
4) Mention the causes, and describe the sensory and the motor effects of 
mononeuropathy and polyneuropathy. 
5) Discuss the sensory, motor, autonomic and brain stem effects of cavitation 
of cervical spinal segments (syringomyelia). 
6) Discuss the sensory, motor and the brain stem effects of bilateral lesion 
affecting the dorsal lumbosacral segments of the spinal cord (tabes dorsalis). 
7) Outline the sensory and the motor effects of a hemi-section lesion affecting 
the midthoracic spinal cord level. 
8) Describe the immediate sensory and motor effects of a mid-thoracic spinal 
cord complete transection. 
9) Describe the late sensory and motor effects of a mid-thoracic spinal cord 
complete transection. 
10) Define the spinal shock stage. Mention its causes, duration, effects and 
progression. 
11) Describe the causes of recovery of reflexes after spinal cord transection. 
Outline the manifestations of this stage. 
12) Describe the acute and the chronic effects of a lesion in the thalamus. 

CNS (Motor) 
1. Regarding alpha motor neurons, which sentence is 
NOT true: 
A. They are larger and more numerous than gamma neurons. 
B. They supply extrafusal skeletal muscle fibers. 
C. Alpha in the lateral part of anterior horn are concerned 
with fine movements 
D. Alpha of flexors are dorsally present to alpha of extensors 
E. All alpha cells that supply a specific muscle represent the 
motor unit. 
2. Regarding alpha motor neurons, which sentence is 
NOT true: 
A. A single alpha cell + its axon + fibers innervated represent 
the motor unit. 
B. Alpha is the final common pathway for muscle contraction. 
C. The motor unit of distal limb muscle involves 200 fibers 
D. Its discharge is affected by projections from higher centers. 
E. Its discharge is affected by spinal cord interneurons. 
3. Compared to alpha motor neurons, gamma motor 
neurons are: 
A. More numerous 
B. Supply ordinary contractile skeletal muscle fibers 
C. One type 
D. Innervates the muscle spindle. 
E. Transmit impulses from the central part of intrafusal fibers. 
4. Which statement is NOT true about Renshaw cells: 
A. Involved in lateral inhibition for sharpening of signals. 
B. Involved in recurrent inhibition to prevent overexcitation 
in spinal cord. 
C. Activates nearby alpha motor neurons. 
D. A glycinergic neuron mediates its action. 
E. Excited by a cholinergic neuron. 
5. The stretch reflex:  
A. Is a polysynaptic reflex.  
B. Is the fastest body reflex.  
C. Receptor is the Pacinian corpuscle.  
D. Has a long central delay. 
E. Results in relaxation of the stretched muscle. 
6. Regarding the muscle spindle, which sentence is NOT  
true:  
A. The primary afferent fibers responds to the static length of 
muscle as well as to its rate of change in length.  
B. Stretching the extrafusal fibres causes the intrafusal muscle 
fibres to be stretched.  
C. They are excited during overstretch of the muscle.  
D. They are parallel to the extrafusal muscle fibers. 
E. Consists of two types of intrafusal fibers 
7. Regarding the stretch reflex, which sentence is NOT 
true:  
A. Can be elicited by passive stretch.  
B. Depends on the muscle spindle which is a mechanoreceptor 
present parallel to the extrafusal muscle fibers.  
C. It is a polysynaptic reflex.  
D. Stretch of a muscle is followed by its contraction. 
E. Is associated with simultaneous inhibition of the antagonist 
muscle.  
8. The gamma efferent system:  
A. Controls spindle sensitivity during voluntary movements.   
B. Supplies the central zone of intrafusal muscle fibers.  
C. Is inhibited by the vestibulo-spinal tract.  
D. When stimulated, causes less discharge of central part of 
muscle spindles. 
E. Produces direct contraction of extrafusal fibers.  
9. The muscle spindles when stimulated transmit 
information about:  
A. The degree of stretch only.  
B. The rate of stretch only.  
C. Both the degree and rate of stretch.  
D. The muscle tension. 
E. The muscle tone. 
10. 
The primary endings innervating the muscle 
spindle:  
A. Only innervates the nuclear chain fibers.  
B. Innervate both nuclear chain and nuclear bag fibers.  
C. Are a slowly conducting nerves  
D. Discharge during the static response only. 
E. End on interneurons in the spinal cord. 
11. 
The nuclear bag intrafusal fibers that signal 
the rate of changes in muscle length are innervated 
by:  
A. Corticospinal neurons.  
B. Alpha motor neurons.  
C. Dynamic gamma motor neurons.  
D. Static gamma motor neurons. 
E. Secondary afferents. 
12. 
Gamma motor neurons:  
A. Transmit signals from intrafusal fibers to the spinal cord.  
B. Cause contraction of the middle portions of the ,muscle 
spindle.  
C. Cause relaxation of the intrafusal fibres.  
D. Cause direct contraction of extrafusal fibers. 
E. Cause contraction of the peripheral part of the intrafusal 
fibers. 
13. 
Functions of stretch reflex does NOT include 
which of the following: 
A. Servo assist voluntary movements. 
B. Allows muscle contraction to increase with minimal brain 
energy 
C. Compensates for muscle weakness. 
D. Maintains body position inspite of application of loads. 
E. Prevent rupture of tendon in cases of severe muscle stretch. 
14. 
Functions of stretch reflex does NOT include 
which of the following: 
A. Signal averaging of impulses reaching the spinal cord. 
B. Make muscle contraction smooth. 
C. Prevents oscillations in muscle contraction. 
D. Maintains upright posture. 
E. Prevent overexcitation in the spinal cord. 
15. 
Compared to nuclear chain fibers, nuclear bag 
intafusal fibers are characterized by: 
A. Monitoring the degree of stretch. 
B. Being a tonic receptor. 
C. Transmit impulses by 1ry & 2ry afferents. 
D. Acts dynamically. 
E. Is the main receptor responsible for muscle tone. 
16. 
Compared to secondary afferent of muscle 
spindle, the primary afferent is characterized by: 
A. Type-II nerve fiber. 
B. Slowly conducting. 
C. Transmit impulses from nuclear bag and nuclear chain 
fibers. 
D. Acts dynamically, but not statically. 
E. Synapses with many spinal cord interneurons. 
17. 
Compared to static stretch reflex, the dynamic 
stretch reflex characterized by: 
A. Its stimulus is maintained muscle stretch. 
B. Its receptor is nuclear bag. 
C. Its afferents are 1ry & 2ry afferents. 
D. Its center is the cerebellum. 
E. Its response is maintained contraction to support the 
muscle. 
18. 
Which of the following is NOT a property of 
stretch reflex: 
A. Reciprocal innervation. 
B. Can by controlled by higher centers. 
C. Monosynaptic and fast. 
D. After discharge. 
E. Is inhibited by severe muscle stretch. 
19. 
Functions of gamma efferents do NOT include: 
A. Prevents shortening of central parts of intrafusal fibers 
during shortening of extrafusal fibers. 
B. Prevents unloading and maintain receptor sensitivity. 
C. Its stimulation produces reflex contraction. 
D. Is one of the sites subjected to supraspinal control on 
stretch reflex. 
E. Monitor muscle length. 
20. 
Stretch reflex activity is facilitated by: 
A. Cortical area 4. 
B. Paleocerebellum. 
C. Medullary reticular formation. 
D. Red nucleus. 
E. Putamen nucleus of basal ganglia. 
21. 
Stretch reflex activity is inhibited by: 
A. Cortical area 4. 
B. Neocerebellum. 
C. Pontine reticular formation. 
D. Vestibular nucleus. 
E. Putamen nucleus of basal ganglia. 
22. 
Muscle spindles:  
A. Are the only receptors present in the skeletal muscle.  
B. Are supplied by the gamma as well as the alpha efferents.  
C. Are length detectors.  
D. Are in series with extrafusal fibers. 
E. Are phasic receptos.  
23. 
Concerning the role of stretch reflex in the 
control of voluntary motor activity:  
A. Its damping function minimizes energy utilization by the 
nervous system.  
B. It protects muscle tendons from high tension.  
C. Through its servo assist function it co-activates the 
extrafusal muscle fibers. 
D. Among its disadvantages, the unloading of receptor during 
muscle contraction. 
E. Among its disadvantages, the decreased receptor 
sensitivity.  
24. 
Regarding muscle tone, which sentence is NOT 
true:  
A. Is defined as resistance offered by muscle to passive 
stretch.  
B. Is maintained by gamma efferent discharges.  
C. Maintains body posture against effect of gravity.  
D. Is decreased in UMNL .  
E. Is the static type of stretch reflex. 
25. 
Hyporeflexia is present in:  
A. Area 6 lesion.  
B. Tabes dorsalis.  
C. Parkinsonism 
D. UMNL. 
E.  Paleocerebellar lesion. 
26. 
Tendon jerks are exaggerated in:  
A. Anterior horn cell disease.  
B. Dorsal root lesions  
C. Chorea.  
D. Internal capsule lesion.  
E. Parkinsonism. 
27. 
MuscIe relaxation evoked by the inverse stretch 
reflex:  
A. Is operated monosynaptically,  
B. Is initiated by the muscle spindle.  
C. Involves inhibition of LMN supplying the muscle.  
D. Can be demonstrated in the right leg when a sharp painful 
stimulus is given to the opposite limb.  
E. Allows muscle contraction with minimal brain energy 
28. 
Which sentence is NOT true regarding the 
autogenic inhibition reaction (inverse stretch 
reflex):  
A. Involves a receptor innervated by group Ib fibres.  
B. Involves excitation of alpha motor neurons.  
C. Can be elicited when the Golgi tendon apparatus is 
stimulated.  
D. Its response aims to decrease muscle tension. 
E. Equalizes the contraction force between muscle fibers 
during voluntary muscle contraction. 
29. 
Golgi tendon organ:  
A. Has a threshold of stimulation equal to the muscle spindle. 
B. Lies in parallel with the extrafusal muscle fibers,  
C. Is stimulated in a monosynaptic muscle reflex.  
D. When stimulated, reflexely relaxes the muscle.  
E. When stimulated, damp the voluntary movements and 
prevent its oscillation 
30. 
The ankle jerk is exaggerated:  
A. Immediately after complete transection of spinal cord at 
mid-thoracic region.  
B. In Parkinsonism.  
C. In neocerebellar disease.  
D. On the right side after damage in the left internal capsule. 
E. In LMNL  
31. 
Muscle tone is NOT reduced in the following 
condition:  
A. Dorsal root lesion.  
B. Upper motor neuron lesion.  
C. Cerebellar lesions.  
D. Caudate lesion. 
E. Immediately following complete transection of the spinal 
cord  
32.  
The inverse stretch reflex:  
A. Depends on a receptor which is situated in the fleshy part 
of the muscle.  
B. Is elicited when the muscle is subjected to excessive 
stretch.  
C. Leads to increased force of muscle contraction.  
D. Is a monosynaptic reflex.  
E. Prevents unloading 
33. 
The flexion withdrawal reflex is initiated by 
simulation of the following receptors:  
A. Pacinian corpuscles.  
B. Golgi tendon organ.  
C. Free nerve endings.  
D. Muscle spindles. 
E.  Proprioceptors. 
34. 
The withdrawal reflex:  
A. Is monosynaptic.  
B. Characterized by after discharge.  
C. Is more rapid than the stretch reflex.  
D. Is intact immediately after complete transaction of the 
spinal cord below level of the lesion. 
E. Has type Ia afferents. 
35. 
Concerning the flexor withdrawal reflex:  
A. It involves reciprocal innervation.  
B. Its central delay is less than that of stretch reflex.  
C. It is a monosynaptic reflex.  
D. It provides an example of inverse stretch reflex.  
E. It servoassists voluntary movements. 
36. 
The crossed extensor reflex:  
A. Provides a typical example of servoassist function.  
B. Is monosynaptic.  
C. Does not involve reciprocal inhibition.  
D. Supports the body from falling. 
E. Is due to stimulation of nuclear bag fibers.  
37. 
Regarding the crossed extensor reflex, which 
sentence is NOT true:  
A. Is a supporting reflex.  
B. Is a polysynaptic spinal reflex.  
C. Has a longer latency than the stretch reflex.  
D. Is elicited by ipsilateral painful stimulus.  
E. An intersegmental interneuron is involved in this reflex. 
38. 
Regarding the plantar reflex, which sentence is 
NOT true:  
A. Is a superficial spinal reflex.  
B. Its center is S1 & S2.  
C. Is lost in UMNL.  
D. The normal response is plantar flexion of all toes.  
E. Is a modification performed by the pyramidal tract to an 
infantile reflex. 
39. 
+ve Babiniski sign is NOT present in:  
A. LMNL.  
B. Chronic UMNL.  
C. Deep sleep.  
D. Coma.  
E. Before the age of 1 year. 
Partial +ve Babiniski sign due to area 4 lesion 
40. 
is:  
A. Plantar flexion of all toes.  
B. Dorsiflexion of all toes.  
C. Dorsiflexion of big toe.  
D. Plantar flexion of big toe.  
E. Fanning of lateral toes. 
41. 
Regarding cortical motor areas. Which 
sentence is NOT true:  
A. Body is represented in the motor cortex 4 crossed, inverted 
and disproportionate to the real size of muscles.  
B. Upper part of the face has bilateral representation.  
C. Supplementary motor area is involved in planning of 
complex motor sequences.  
D. Premotor area initiates fine movements. 
E. Supplementary motor area is involved in planning of 
internal directed movements. 
42. 
The larger area of representation in the motor 
cortex includes muscles:  
A. That extend the shoulder.  
B. That flex the knee.  
C. Of the trunk.  
D. Of vocalization. 
E. Of the back.  
43. 
Specialized functions of the pre-motor cortex do 
NOT include:  
A. Voluntary eye movement.  
B. Head rotation.  
C. Speech.  
D. Increase muscle tone. 
E. Skilled hand movement  
44. 
Regarding the primary motor cortex (area 4), 
which sentence is NOT true:  
A. Is responsible for fine delicate movements.  
B. Parts of the body are represented in an area which is 
directly proportional in size to the complexity of movement 
carried by that part.  
C. Is facilitatory to pontine reticular formation.  
D. Is stimulatory to stretch reflex. 
E. Is essential for +ve Babiniski sign. 
45. 
The cortical motor area 4 on the left side of the 
body:  
A. There is a map representing body parts on the right side.  
B. The body is represented in an erect (upright) pattern.  
C. Controls motor activity of the left side of the body.  
D. The area representing a particular body muscle is directly 
proportional in size to the size of that muscle. 
E. Its lesion produces contralateral hemiplegia.  
46. 
Which sentence is NOT true regarding the 
primary motor area:  
A. Is present in the precentral gyrus.  
B. Is highly excitable.  
C. Sends impulses to AHCs along the cortico-spinal tract.  
D. Controls activity of the hand and finger muscles on the 
contralateral side. 
E. Its lesion produces loss of memory of learned motor acts. 
47. 
The pyramidal tract:  
A. Arises only from subcortical areas.  
B. Carries its functions immediately after birth.  
C. Most of its fibers do not cross.  
D. Responsible for fine movements. 
E. Some fibers are facilitatory and others are inhibitory to 
stretch reflex.  
48. 
Which sentence is NOT true regarding the 
premotor area and its specialized areas:  
A. Broca's area programs sequences of contraction of muscles 
of vocalization.  
B. Voluntary eye movements controls conjugate eye 
movement.  
C. It plans for internal directed complex movements.  
D. Hand skill area helps coordination of hand movement. 
E. Is less excitable than area 4. 
49. 
In controlling the fine movement of the hands, 
the corticospinal tract terminates on:  
A. Renshaw cells.  
B. Spinal cord interneurons.  
C. Spinal lateral alpha motor neurons.  
D. Posterior horm cells. 
E. Lateral horn cells.  
50. 
The lateral motor system includes :- 
A. The lateral Reticulospinal tract 
B. The lateral corticospinal tract 
C. The lateral vestibulospinal tract 
D. The tectospinal tracts  
E. All the above tracts. 
51. 
Which sentence is NOT true regarding a lesion 
in premotor area:  
A. It does not produce paralysis.  
B. It produces pariesis of gross movements.  
C. It produces hypertonia and hyperreflexia.  
D. It produces motor apraxia. 
E. It produces loss of plantar and grasp reflexes. 
52. 
+VE Babinski sign is NOT present in:  
A. Pyramidal lesion.  
B. Chronic UMNL.  
C. Cerebellar lesion.  
D. Deep sleep. 
E. Comma. 
53. 
Which area is NOT involved in planning of 
movements:  
A. Premotor area.  
B. Supplemental motor area.  
C. Primary motor area.  
D. Basal ganglia. 
E. Cerebellum. 
Model Answers 
1 E  16 C  31 B  46 E 
2 C  17 B  32 B  47 D 
3 D  18 D  33 C  48 C 
4 C  19 E  34 B  49 C 
5 B  20 A  35 A  50 B 
6 C  21 E  36 D  51 E 
7 C  22 C  37 D  52 C 
8 A  23 C  38 C  53 C 
9 C  24 D  39 A    
10 B  25 B  40 C    
11 C  26 D  41 D    
12 E  27 C  42 D    
13 E  28 B  43 D    
14 E  29 D  44 E    
15 D  30 D  45 A    
 
Essay Questions 
1) List the types of body movements. Mention the requirements needed for 
each type. 
2) Discuss alpha anterior motor neurons, and list the factors affecting their rate 
of discharge. 
3) Describe the: motor unit, motor neuron pool and final common path. 
4) Compare between alpha and gamma motor neurons. 
5) Discuss the mechanism of action and the functions of Renshaw spinal cord 
interneurons. 
6) Discuss muscle stretch reflex and its physiological types. 
7) Discuss muscle stretch reflex and its suraspinal control. 
8) Discuss muscle stretch reflex and its role in control of voluntary movements 
(functions). 
9) Discuss muscle stretch reflex and its characters. 
10) Discuss structure of muscle spindle. 
11) Compare between nuclear bag and nuclear chain intrafusal fibers. 
12) Describe innervation of muscle spindle. 
13) List the methods of excitation of the muscle spindle. 
14) Compare and contrast between the two functional types of stretch reflex. 
15) Describe the role of gamma motor neurons in motor functions (effects of 
gamma efferent discharge). 
16) Outline the physiological basis of muscle tone. 
17) Define the inverse stretch reflex. List its components. 
18) Compare between stretch reflex and inverse stretch reflex. 
19) Compare between muscle spindle and Golgi tendon organ. 
20) Describe the flexor withdrawal reflex and outline its properties. 
21) Give an account on the crossed extensor reflex. 
22) Describe the abdominal and the planter superficial reflexes.  
23) Describe the body representation and the characters of each of area 4 and 
area 6. 
24) Compare and contrast between primary motor and premotor cortical 
areas. 
25) List the functions and the effects of lesions in the areas responsible for 
motor control. 
26) Discuss the supplemental motor area and the specialized motor areas. 
27) Outline the mechanism of generation, initiation and execution of 
voluntary movements. 
28) Mention the value of cerebral blood flow. Outline the arterial supply, 
capillary characters and venous drainage of cerebral blood flow. 
29) Define autoregulation of cerebral blood flow. Discuss the involved 
mechanisms.  
30) List the determinants and the factors affecting cerebral blood flow. 
31) List the functions of the pyramidal and the extrapyramidal tracts. 
32) Compare between the pyramidal and the extrapyramidal tracts. 
33) Compare between the medial and the lateral brain stem pathways. 
34) Compare between the medial and the lateral descending motor systems. 

PH3/2023
Higher Brain Functions
MCQs
Higher brain functions 
1- Concerning reticular formation: 
A- It is purely concerned with sensory functions. 
B- Its sensory neurons are facilitatory to spinal cord and cortex. 
C- Its sensory neurons are inhibitory to spinal cord. 
D- Its sensory neurons are interconnected and allow divergence, 
convergence and afterdischarge. 
E- Its medullary part is the basis of consciousness and arousal. 
2- Concerning reticular formation, all are true EXCEPT: 
A- It receives impulses from various somatic, special sense pathways and 
higher brain centers. 
B- Its inhibitory motor part inhibits the spinal cord motor neurons of 
antigravity muscles. 
C- Its facilitatory motor part excites both the cortex and the spinal cord. 
D- Its intrinsic activity is a character of all its components. 
E- Red nucleus and paleocerebellum inhibit its pontine component. 
3- Concerning reticular formation, all are true EXCEPT: 
A- It excites all parts of cortex through ARAS. 
B- It is a link between higher and lower CNS centers. 
C- It is responsible for perception and localization of fast pain. 
D- It is responsible for brain electrical activity. 
E- Its descending motor facilitatory component plays a role in body 
support. 
4- Which of the following is NOT involved in decreasing the 
activity of the pontine reticular formation? 
A- Cortical inhibitory areas. 
B- Red nucleus. 
C- Medullary reticular formation. 
D- Basal ganglia. 
E- Corticofugal fibers. 
1--
PH3/2023
Higher Brain Functions
MCQs
5- RAS activity is enhanced by: 
A- Prolonged activity of its neurons. 
B- Activation of sleep inducing centers. 
C- General anesthesia. 
D- Withdrawal of sensory and motor impulses affecting reticular 
formation. 
E- Thyroid hormones. 
6- Brain electrical activity is inhibited by: 
A- Corticofugal impulses. 
B- Stress and sympathetic effect. 
C- Increase activity of the anterior hypothalamus. 
D- Analeptic drugs. 
E- Caffeine. 
7- Pontine reticular formation is NOT characterized by: 
A- Has intrinsic activity. 
B- Has descending and ascending fibers. 
C- Has a sleep center in its upper part. 
D- Non-specifically activates the whole cortex, mainly directly. 
E- Its activity is inhibited by the medullary reticular formation. 
8- Which of the following is NOT a character of ARAS: 
A- Present in pons and midbrain. 
B- Indirectly and directly excites the whole cortex. 
C- Receives excitatory impulses from cortical areas. 
D- Facilitates spinal cord motor neurons of antigravity muscles. 
E- Responsible for arousal. 
9- Reticular formation: 
A- Responsible for pain modulation. 
B- Increases lower limb flexor muscle tone during standing. 
C- Its activity results in a localized cortical activation. 
D- Its medullary descending branch has intrinsic activity. 
E- is present in the whole cortex. 
2--
PH3/2023
Higher Brain Functions
MCQs
10- Medullary reticular formation is stimulated by: 
A- Primary motor cortex. 
B- Cerebrocerebellum. 
C- Basal ganglia. 
D- Vestibular nucleus. 
E- Gamma motor neurons of spinal cord anterior horn. 
11- Which sentence is NOT true about the reticular 
formation: 
A- Its excitatory component is located in the pons. 
B- Its medullary component is inhibitory to all cortical areas. 
C- Its excitatory components constitutes the ARAS. 
D- Its pontine part is excitatory to spinal cord motor neurons. 
E- It is stimulated by both of corticofugal and sensory fibers. 
12- Regarding Evoked brain potentials: 
A- It is used for mapping of the brain. 
B- It is recorded in a conscious person. 
C- It consists of a primary diffuse wave followed by a secondary 
localized wave. 
D- It is due to activity of RAS. 
E- It represents summation of excitatory and inhibitory potentials in brain 
neurons 
13- Secondary evoked potential is characterized by: 
A- Localized to a specific cortical area. 
B- Consists of a small +ve followed by a small –ve wave. 
C- Similar to beta waves of EEG. 
D- Due to stimulation of non-specific thalamic nuclei. 
E- Recorded when the person shows mental activity. 
3--
PH3/2023
Higher Brain Functions
MCQs
14- Electroencephalogram: 
A- Recorded in an anaesthetized person. 
B- Represents summation of EPSP & IPSP in brain neurons. 
C- Theta waves dominate in adult during awake state with mental rest. 
D- Beta waves are recorded in light sleep. 
E- A diffuse generalized wave is recorded after an initial localized small 
wave. 
15- Brain waves: 
A- Regular synchronized alpha waves are recorded in paradoxical sleep. 
B- Desynchronized, low voltage, high frequency waves are recorded due 
to activation of RAS. 
C- Highest voltage low frequency waves are recorded in adults during 
awake relaxed state. 
D- Intrinsic activity of reticular formation produces beta waves. 
E- Gamma waves are recorded in deep sleep. 
16- EEG: 
A- Is recorded to map the brain. 
B- Is used for identification of sleep stages. 
C- Desynchronized waves are replaced by synchronized waves in 
response to opening of eyes. 
D- Show low frequency- high voltage waves in case of brain death. 
E- Is recorded in an anesthetized person after receptor stimulation. 
17- The EEG wave recorded in children and in emotionally 
stressed adults is: 
A- Alpha (8-13 HZ, 50µv, regular, synchronized). 
B- Beta (13-30 HZ, 25µv, irregular, desynchronized). 
C- Theta (4-7 HZ, 100µv, regular, synchronized). 
D- Delta (0.5-3.5 HZ, 100µv, regular, synchronized). 
E- Gamma (30-80 HZ, 0.5-2µv, irregular, desynchronized). 
4--
PH3/2023
Higher Brain Functions
MCQs
18- The EEG wave recorded in high mental activity, 
hyperaroused state is: 
A- Alpha (8-13 HZ, 50µv, regular, synchronized). 
B- Beta (13-30 HZ, 25µv, irregular, desynchronized). 
C- Theta (4-7 HZ, 100µv, regular, synchronized). 
D- Delta (0.5-3.5 HZ, 100µv, regular, synchronized). 
E- Gamma (30-80 HZ, 0.5-2µv, irregular, desynchronized). 
19- β waves of EEG are: 
A- Character of relaxed awake state. 
B- Faster than α waves, but slower than δ waves. 
C- Recorded in children. 
D- Disappear when the person becomes alert. 
E- Recorded in paradoxical sleep. 
20- Which sentence is NOT true regarding consciousness? 
A- It is due to non-specific activation of the whole cortex by the intrinsic 
activity of RAS. 
B- It is maintained by a +ve feedback loop between the cortex and the 
reticular formation. 
C- It occurs when norepinephrine and serotonin neuronal discharge from 
the brain stem nuclei is increased. 
D- It is associated with increased histamine discharge from the posterior 
hypothalamus. 
E- Increased cholinergic neuronal discharge of the upper brain stem 
nuclei maintains its level 
21- Sleep, all are true EXCEPT: 
A- It helps brain rest and brain plasticity. 
B- It may be due to synaptic fatigue of RAS neurons. 
C- It may be due to active inhibition of RAS by sleep centers. 
D- It may be due to increased activity of raphe magnus and locus 
coeruleus brain stem nuclei. 
D- It may be due to accumulation of sleep-inducing lipids or peptide in 
the CSF. 
5--
PH3/2023
Higher Brain Functions
MCQs
22- REM sleep differs from Non-REM sleep in: 
A- Has longer duration in the sleep cycles. 
B- Low voltage desynchronized brain waves are recorded during it. 
C- Presence of sleep walking & talking. 
D- Low threshold of arousal. 
E- Increased level of growth hormone. 
23- Paradoxical sleep is characterized by: 
A- Occurs at the start of sleep cycle. 
B- Includes 4 sleep stages. 
C- Movement of eye, finger and toe muscles. 
D- Marked decrease in blood pressure and heart rate. 
E- Important for physical rest. 
24- Compared to REM sleep, Non-REM sleep is 
characterized by: 
A- Dreams and penile erection. 
B- Irregular HR and ABP. 
C- Movements in small muscles of fingers and toes. 
D- Increase in growth hormone secretion. 
E- Recording of high frequency, low voltage, desynchronized brain 
waves. 
25- Non-REM sleep is characterized by: 
A- Occurs in episodes, that gradually increase in duration. 
B- High arousal threshold. 
C- Important for mental rest. 
D- Small muscle movement of fingers and toes. 
E- Recording of low frequency, high voltage, synchronized brain waves 
throughout its stages. 
26- Which of the following is a REM sleep center: 
A- Raphe nucleus. 
B- Locus coeruleus. 
C- Reticular formation. 
D- Anterior hypothalamus. 
E- Suprachiasmatic nucleus of hypothalamus. 
6--
PH3/2023
Higher Brain Functions
MCQs
27- Which of the following is a neurotransmitter for REM 
sleep: 
A- AcetylCholine. 
B- Norepinephrine. 
C- Serotonin. 
D- Histamine. 
E- GABA. 
28- Which of the following sentences about sleep and arousal 
is true: 
A- Posterior hypothalamus is a Non-REM sleep center. 
B- Cholinergic neurons of upper brain stem induce arousal. 
C- Serotonergic brain stem neurons induce REM sleep. 
D- Suprachasmatic nucleus is a REM sleep center. 
E- Orexin hormone of the hypothalamus regulates brain stem nuclei 
activity and switches the activity between seep and arousal. 
29- Which sentence is most correct about cortical 
complementary specialization: 
A- Categorical hemisphere is concerned with recognition and with artistic 
talents. 
B- Lesion in the categorical hemisphere leads to inability to understand 
the color of speech. 
C- Representational hemisphere is involved in logical and analytical 
functions. 
D- Lesion in the representational hemisphere leads to aphasia. 
E- Visuospatial relations of the body and its surroundings is a primary 
function of representational hemisphere. 
30- Parieto-occipito-temporal association area: 
A- Is highly developed in the categorical hemisphere. 
B- Contains Broca’s word formation area. 
C- Its lesion may result in amorphosynthesis, unilateral neglect, receptive 
aphasia or anomic aphasia, depending on the affected hemisphere. 
D- Is involved in planning of voluntary movements. 
E- Its lesion leads to loss of recent memory. 
. 
7--
PH3/2023
Higher Brain Functions
MCQs
31- Lesion in the prefrontal association area produces: 
A- Unilateral neglect. 
B- Motor aphasia. 
C- Fluent aphasia. 
D- Anomic aphasia. 
E. Conductive aphasia. 
32- Which of the following is NOT a function of the 
prefrontal association area: 
A- Operation of working memory. 
B- Storage of coordinated vocalization programs. 
C- Decision making and personality traits. 
D- Thoughts. 
E. Language comprehension. 
33- Concerning speech, all are true EXCEPT: 
A- Sensory aphasia occurs due to defect in visual association area, 
auditory association area or Wernicke’s area. 
B- Expressive aphasia occurs due to lesion in Broca’s area or Exner’s 
area. 
C- Anomic aphasia is due to lesion in and around auditory cortex. 
D- In anomic aphasia, the patient can not give name for seen pictures and 
words. 
E- Aphasia occurs only in case of lesion in the categorical hemisphere. 
34- Speech: 
A- Is a purely motor higher brain function. 
B- Wernicke’s area is the motor speech center. 
C- Angular gyrus gives a meaning for auditory language. 
D- Programs of expression are stored in the frontal lobe. 
E- Broca’s area send direct impulses to muscles of vocalization. 
8--
PH3/2023
Higher Brain Functions
MCQs
35- Aphasia: 
A- Is an abnormal speech due to defect in articulation. 
B- Is of fluent type due to lesion in Wernicke’s area. 
C- May be due to lower motor neuron lesion of vocalization muscles. 
D- Is expressive in type due to lesion in auditory association cortex. 
E- Broca’s aphasia characterized by excessive meaningless speech. 
36- Damage of the general interpretative area would NOT 
produce: 
A- Defect in articulation. 
B- Defect in comprehension of visual and auditory languages. 
C- Defect in determination of thoughts and words. 
D- Sensory aphasia. 
E- Fluent aphasia. 
37- Lesion in frontal lobe speech centers produces: 
A- Speech muscle paralysis. 
B- Inability to select appropriate words. 
C- Inability to process visual languages. 
D- Sensory aphasia. 
E- Expressive defect in speech. 
38- Speech centers do NOT include: 
A- Wernicke’s area. 
B- Broca’s area. 
C- Somatic sensory association area. 
D- Auditory association area. 
E- Visual association area. 
39- Sensory aphasia occurs with lesion in: 
A- Visual pathway. 
B- Broca’s area. 
C- Exner’s area. 
D- Auditory association area. 
E- Tongue muscles. 
9--
PH3/2023
Higher Brain Functions
MCQs
40- Motor aphasia occurs with lesion in: 
A- Primary motor area. 
B- Auditory association area. 
C- Wernicke’s area. 
D- Angular gyrus. 
E- Exner’s area. 
41- Regarding dysarthria, all of the following are true 
EXCEPT: 
A- It is a speech abnormality due to defect in articulation . 
B- It occurs in UMNL & LMNL affecting speech muscles. 
C- Is of slow monotonus type in Parkinsonism. 
D- Is of spastic type due to lesion in Wernicke’s area. 
E- Is of ataxic staccato type in neocerebellar syndrome 
42- Concerning Learning: 
A- In habituation, a repeated benign stimulus produces gradual loss of 
response. 
B- Associative learning is present when a noxious stimulus occurs with a 
benign one. 
C- Pairing of stimuli is a type of simple learning. 
D- Adding a reward to decrease a certain behavior is a +ve reinforcement. 
E- In classical conditioning, an unconditioned stimulus can produce a 
certain response only when paired with a neutral conditioned stimulus. 
43- Concerning learning: 
A- Habituation is due to increase intracellular calcium leading to 
augmented response. 
B- Sensitization occurs by presynaptic facilitation. 
C- Operant conditioning occurs by inducing a response to a neutral 
stimulus. 
D- Classical conditioning occurs by stimulation of reward and 
punishment centers. 
E- -ve operant conditioning means adding of something to induce 
learning of a specific task or behavior  
11--
PH3/2023
Higher Brain Functions
MCQs
44- In memory: 
A- Implicit memory is the conscious recall of information. 
B- Explicit memory is stored in basal ganglia and cerebellum. 
C- Explicit memory types include priming and procedural memory. 
D- Episodic memory is stored in the hippocampus and neocortex. 
E- Semantic memory is the recall of events and experiences. 
45- In memory: 
A- Associative and non-associative learning are of non-declarative 
memory types. 
B- Semantic reflexive memory is stored in the temporal lobe. 
C- Episodic reflexive memory is stored in the prefrontal cortex. 
D- Perceptual memory is stored in the striatum. 
E- Procedural memory is stored in the neocortex 
46- Short-term memory is: 
A- Stored after 2 hours from getting the information. 
B- Brain capacity for it is unlimited. 
C- Encoded and stored in the neocortex. 
D- Due to transient synaptic modifications such as increased release of 
neurotransmitters. 
E- Involves gene activation and protein synthesis 
47- Long-term memory is: 
A- Stored immediately after getting the information. 
B- Brain capacity for it is limited. 
C- Encoded in hippocampus and stored in the frontal lobe. 
D- Due to transient synaptic modifications such as increased release of 
neurotransmitters. 
E- Involves gene activation and protein synthesis. 
48- Mechanisms of long-term memory do NOT include: 
A- Transient synaptic modifications. 
B- Increase presynaptic terminals and vesicles. 
C- Structural and functional synaptic changes. 
D- Formation of new synapses. 
E- Gene activation and protein synthesis 
11--
PH3/2023
Higher Brain Functions
MCQs
49- Which sentence is NOT true regarding consolidation of 
memory: 
A- It is the conversion of short-term memory to a long-term one. 
B- Completed in 5 minutes. 
C- Represents the time needed for the structural and functional synaptic 
changes to take place. 
D- Occurs in neocortex. 
E- Increases and fastens by focusing and rehearsal. 
50- Consolidation of memory increases by: 
A- Anesthesia. 
B- Sleep. 
C- Concussion. 
D- Electroshock therapy. 
E- Mental fatigue. 
51- Consolidation of memory decreases by: 
A- Interesting information. 
B- Lack of REM sleep. 
C- Rehearsal. 
D- Mental rest. 
E- Quiet sleep. 
52- The primary role of amygdala in memory is: 
A- Storage of semantic memory. 
B- Consolidation of memory. 
C- Operation of short-term memory. 
D- Processing and remembering the emotional component of memories. 
E- Initiation of synaptic changes needed for memory storage. 
12--
PH3/2023
Higher Brain Functions
MCQs
53- Habituation: 
A- Is the gradual increase in response in presence of a repeated stimulus. 
B- Is involved in operant conditioning. 
C- Explained by gradual inactivation of Ca++ channels in the 
postsynaptic neuron. 
D- Leads to the formation of new synapses. 
E- Is due to gradual decrease in the neurotransmitter release in the 
involved pathway. 
54- Post-tetanic facilitation: 
A- Is a gradual loss of response to a repeated benign stimulus. 
B- The postsynaptic response continues as long as the presynaptic 
stimulation is maintained. 
C- Explained by accumulation of Ca++ in the presynaptic neuron upon 
rapid short-term stimulation. 
D- Is associated with decrease postsynaptic response after removal of 
presynaptic stimulation. 
E- Is the basis of classical conditioning. 
55- Which sentence is NOT true about sensitization: 
A- A prolonged augmented response occurs when a noxious stimulus 
paired to a benign stimulus. 
B- It is due to serotonin-induced presynaptic facilitation. 
C- Is involved in short-term memory. 
D- Is involved in long-term memory. 
E- It continues up to 60 seconds after removal of the stimulus. 
56- Which sentence is NOT correct for long-term 
potentiation: 
A- A rapid repeated brief stimulation leads to a persistent enhancement of 
response. 
B- Glutamate transmitter and its NMDA receptors may play a role. 
C- Increase Ca++ in pre and post-synaptic neurons may play a role. 
D- Protein synthesis, growth and increased neuronal connections are 
possible mechanisms. 
E- Involved in cerebellar learning. 
13--
PH3/2023
Higher Brain Functions
MCQs
57- In long-term depression: 
A- A rapid repeated brief stimulation leads to a persistent enhancement of 
response. 
B- A slow, prolonged, low frequency stimulation leads to decrease 
strength of synaptic transmission. 
C- A rapid tetanizing presynaptic stimulation leads to continuation of 
postsynaptic response after removal of the stimulus. 
D- A noxious stimulus leads to presynaptic facilitation of a habituated 
pathway. 
E- A continuous benign stimulus leads to gradual increase in response. 
58- Amnesia: 
A- In retrograde amnesia, remote memories are lost. 
B- In anterograde amnesia, remote memories are intact. 
C- In global amnesia, recent memories are intact. 
D- In Alzheimer’s disease, amnesia occurs due to dopamine deficiency. 
E- In atherosclerotic brain lesions, the person is unable to remember old 
events. 
59- Functions of the limbic system do NOT include: 
A- Perception and discrimination of olfaction. 
B- Control of feeding, maternal and sexual behaviors. 
C- Control of emotions. 
D- Control of water balance. 
E- Control of motivations. 
60- Which sentence is NOT true about the Amygdala: 
A- Is involved in processing of the emotional components of memories. 
B- Is involved in processing of the emotional responses to odors. 
C- Its lesion leads to hyperphagia and omniphagia. 
D- Its stimulation leads to rage and aggression. 
E- Is the area for consolidation of memory. 
14--
PH3/2023
Higher Brain Functions
MCQs
61- Concerning motivations: 
A- Approach system is present in the periventricular area of 
hypothalamus. 
B- Acetyl choline is the transmitter of pleasure and satisfaction. 
C- Amygdala is a part of both approach and avoidance systems. 
D- Stimulation of periaqueductal gray area causes the release of 
dopamine. 
E- Stimulation of lateral and ventromedial hypothalamic nuclei produces 
fear and displeasure. 
62- Characters of Papez circuit do NOT include: 
A- Habituation. 
B- After discharge. 
C- Reverberating circuits. 
D- Involved in emotions. 
E- Thalamus and hypothalamus are parts of this circuit. 
63- The hypothalamus performs all of the following functions 
EXCEPT: 
A- Control of autonomic functions. 
B- Regulation of anterior and posterior pituitary hormonal secretion. 
C- Control of voluntary movements. 
D- Regulation of body temperature. 
E- Control of appetite and food intake. 
64- Regarding the hypothalamus: 
A- Satiety center has intrinsic activity. 
B- Heat gain center is present in the anterior hypothalamus. 
C- Ventromedial nucleus synchronize body activities according to dark
light cycles. 
D- Posterior hypothalamus function as a sleep center. 
E- Anterior hypothalamic nuclei play a role in all of sleep, heat loss, 
parasympathetic activity and sexual drive. 
15--
PH3/2023
Higher Brain Functions
MCQs
65- Lateral nuclei of hypothalamus are NOT involved in: 
A- Feeding and thirst. 
B- Release of orexin hormone. 
C- Rage. 
D- Approach motivation. 
E- Heat gain. 
16--
MCQs Higher Brain Functions         PH3/2023 - 17 - 
 
Model Answer 
 
1 D  21 D  41 D  61 C 
2 D  22 B  42 A  62 A 
3 C  23 C  43 B  63 C 
4 E  24 D  44 D  64 E 
5 E  25 E  45 A  65 E 
6 C  26 C  46 D    
7 D  27 A  47 E    
8 D  28 E  48 A    
9 A  29 E  49 B    
10 C  30 C  50 B    
11 B  31 B  51 B    
12 A  32 E  52 D    
13 D  33 C  53 E    
14 B  34 D  54 C    
15 B  35 B  55 E    
16 B  36 A  56 E    
17 C  37 E  57 B    
18 E  38 C  58 B    
19 E  39 D  59 D    
20 E  40 E  60 E    

CNS (Sensory-3) 
1) The main final destination of signals that carry conscious 
kinesthetic sensations is the:  
a) Non-specific thalamic nuclei.  
b) Ventrolateral nuclei of the thalamus.  
c) Basal Ganglia.  
d) Cerebellum. 
e) Post-central gyrus of the cerebral cortex. 
2) The dorsal column system:  
a) Carries sensation from the same side of the body.  
b) Transmit fine degrees of thermal sensations.  
c) Has a final relay in the non-specific thalamic nuclei of the thalamus.  
d) Activates non-specific areas in the cerebral cortex. 
e) Composed of Aβ fibers. 
3) Proprioceptive sensations:  
a) Detect change of position.  
b) Detect touch of body parts.  
c) Have their receptors in the skin.  
d) Are transmitted in the spinothalamic tract. 
e) Are protopathic sensations. 
4) Kinesthetic sensations:  
a) Have their receptors in the joint capsule.  
b) Allow weight discrimination.  
c) Are conducted via ventral spinothalamic tract.  
d) Are the perception of rapid repetitive stimuli. 
e)  Are carried by Aδ fibers. 
5) Regarding tactile sensations:  
a) Crude touch is carried mainly along Aβ fibers.  
b) Merkel's discs detect fine touch.  
c) Fine touch relayed in non-specific thalamic nuclei.  
d) Vibration is transmitted via spinothalamic tract.  
e) Proprioception is a phasic sensation. 
6) Fine touch sensations:  
a) Are not sharply localized.  
b) Need a relatively high threshold stimulus.  
c) Are transmitted via dorsal column.  
d) Are detected by free nerve endings. 
e) Are thalamic sensations. 
7) Fine touch sensation:  
a) Is detected by phasic receptors.  
b) Is conducted by C fibres.  
c) Is finally relayed in the thalamus.  
d) Is of high acuity on the back of the shoulder than on the fingers. 
e) Is an anterolateral sensation. 
8) Two-point discrimination is more accurate:  
a) At the back.  
b) The more the convergence of afferents.  
c) The more the number of receptors.  
d) The less the cortical area of representation. 
e) The more larger is the receptive field. 
9) The distance by which two touch stimuli must be 
separated to be perceived as two separate stimuli is 
greatest on:  
a) The lips.  
b) The palm of the hand.  
c) The skin over the scapula.  
d) The tips of the finger. 
e) The tip of tongue. 
10) 
Vibration sense:  
a) Is sensed by free nerve endings,  
b) Depends on past cortical experience.  
c) Is a poorly localized sensation.  
d) Is carried on spinothalamic tract. 
e) Is carried on gracile and cuneate tracts. 
11) 
Which sentence is NOT true regarding vibration 
sense:  
a) Touch and pressure are involved in it.  
b) It is an epicritic sensation.  
c) Is carried by Aβ type of afferents.  
d) Its receptors are tonic. 
e) Its receptors are Pacinian and Meissner’s corpuscles. 
12) 
Stereognosis:  
a) Depends on past cortical experience.  
b) Is carried in spinothalamic tract.  
c) Depends mainly on crude touch.  
d) Threshold differs from one person to another. 
e) Needs intact cortical area 4. 
13) 
Stereognosis sensation needs:  
a) Intact all sensations.  
b) Previous cortical experience.  
c) Intact sensory cortex specially area 5,7. 
d) High degree of cortical processing. 
e) All of the above. 
14)  
Deep pressure sensation:  
a) Its receptors are Merckle’s discs.  
b) Carried by C afferents.  
c) Transmitted by anterolateral system. 
d) Is a protopathic sensation. 
e) Its receptors are stimulated by mechanical form of energy. 
15) 
A patient who has had destruction of somatic 
sensory area I on the left side will show:  
a) Total lack of pain sensation on the same side:  
b) Total lack of temperature sensation on the same side.  
c) Inability to identify objects put in the left hand.  
d) Astereognosis in the right hand. 
e) Loss of dorsal column sensations, and intact spinothalamic sensations 
on the right side of the body. 
16) 
The size of representation of various body parts in 
the primary somatic sensory cortex is dependent on:  
a) Relative size of the body parts.  
b) Density of the receptors in that part.  
c) Size of the muscles in that body part.  
d) Conduction velocity of the afferent fibers. 
e)  Frequency of impulses discharged from receptors. 
17) 
Primary somatic sensory cortex is NOT 
characterized by:  
a) Crossed representation of body parts.  
b) Inverted representation of body parts. 
c) High degree of localization of body parts.  
d) Proportionate representation of body parts. 
e) Perception of epicritic sensations. 
18) 
Lesion in primary somatic sensory cortex does NOT 
produce:  
a) Loss of the ability of fine localization.  
b) Loss of judgement of critical degrees of weights. 
c) Loss of judgement of orientation of body parts.  
d) Loss of judgement of critical degrees of temperature. 
e) Marked loss of pain perception. 
19) 
Regarding the somatosensory cortex, which 
sentence is NOT true:  
a) S-II is characterized by poor localization compared to S-I.  
b) S-II is important in tactile learning and memory. 
c) Lesion in sensory association area results in partial neglect of stimuli 
of the contralateral side of lesion.  
d) Lesion in sensory association area results in the ability to feel one side 
only of an object. 
e) Association area lesion results in loss of learning by manipulation. 
20) 
Which sentence is NOT true about the thalamus,:  
a) Its non-specific nuclei transmit epicritic sensations to the 
somatosensory cortex 
b) It is the site of perception of crude sensations. 
c) Is involved in motor activities by connecting the basal ganglia and 
cerebellum to the motor cortex.  
d) Plays a role in consciousness by receiving impulses from reticular 
formation to activate the whole cortex. 
e) Connected to the limbic cortex to help in emotional responses. 
Model Answer 
1 
E  
11 
D    
2 
E  
12 
A    
3 
A  
13 
E    
4 
A  
14 
E    
5 
B  
15 
D    
6 
C  
16 
B    
7 
A  
17 
D    
8 
C  
18 
E    
9 
C  
19 
E    
10 
E  
20 
A    
Short Essay Questions 
1- 
2- 
3- 
4- 
5- 
6- 
7- 
8- 
9- 
Compare tactile localization and tactile discrimination 
sensations. 
Discuss conscious proprioceptive sensations. 
Discuss vibration sensation. 
Discuss deep pressure sensation. 
Define stereognosis and enumerate its requirements. 
Describe the site, body representation and characters of 
primary somatic sensory area. 
List the functions and the effects of lesion of the primary 
somatic sensory area. 
Explain the effects of a lesion in S-I on epicritic and on 
protopathic sensations. 
Enumerate the input and the output of secondary somatic 
sensory area. 
10- List the functions and the effects of lesion in S-II. 
11- Give an account on somatic sensory association cortex, and 
mention the effects of its destruction. 
12- Give an account on neglect syndrome. 
13- List the functions of the thalamus. 
14- List the sensory and the motor functions of the thalamus. 

Pharmacology

1. The following is not true about antipsychotics:
A. Control symptoms of schizophrenia without affecting the basic disorder.
B. Low potency drugs are preferred in elderly & cardiac patients.
C. Thioridazine may block cardiac conduction & increase QT interval.
D. They do not induce dependence
2. The correct statement (s) regarding extrapyramidal effects of 
antipsychotics
A. Occur most commonly with low potency agents.
B. Tardive dyskinesia is relieved by anticholinergics
C. Anticholinergics are useful in neuroleptic-induced parkinsonism.
D. Both A and B.
3. The following is/are correctly matched with areas of dopamine blockade
A. Extrapyramidal effects /basal ganglia
B. Antipsychotic/mesolimbic
C. Antiemetic /chemoreceptor trigger zone
D. All of the above.
4. The risk of inducing rigidity, tremors& tardive dyskinesia in 
schizophrenics is highest with
A. Haloperidol.
B. Thioridazine.
C. Clozapine.
D. Olanzapine.
5. A drug effective in reducing emotional bluntness in schizophrenics is
A. Carbamazepine.
B. Clozapine.
C. Chlorpromazine.
D. Clonazepam.
6. Which of the following drugs could rapidly calm a violent patient?
A. Haloperidol.
B. Buspirone.
C. Flumazenil.
D. Fluoxetine
7. A drug reserved for resistant cases of schizophrenia for fear of 
agranulocytosis?
A. Haloperidol.
B. Clozapine.
C. Olanzapine.
D. Risperidone.
8. Which of the following improves negative symptoms in schizophrenia?
A. Thioridazine.
B. Risperidone.
C. Haloperidol.
D. Chlorpromazine.
9. Thiamine deficiency occurs most commonly with abuse of:
A. Heroin.
B. Alcohol.
C. Cocaine.
D. Cannabis.
10. The following is not true about drug abuse:
A. Short acting agents are less liable to be abused.
B. Death from cocaine overdose may result from severe hypertension.
C. A red eye is one of the consequences Of cannabis addiction.
D. Bupropion reduces craving in patients who quit smoking.
11. The following abused drug is WRONGLY matched to replacement 
therapy :
A. Pentobarbital/phenobarbital.
B. Morphine/methadone.
C. Alcohol/disulfiram.
D. Alprazolam/diazepam.
12. Nicotine abuse may be managed by
A. Varenicline.
B. Bupropion.
C. Buprenorphine.
D. Acamprosate
E. A and B
21. The following is wrong regarding management of alcohol abuse
A. Naltrexone: blocks opioid receptors → ↓ relapse.
B. Acamprosate: weak NMDA antagonist &GABA receptor activator 
→↓ craving
C. Triazolam replaces alcohol because it has smoother withdrawal
D. Disulfiram is used as psychotherapy
22. The following is incorrect regarding management of nicotine abues
A. Nicotine replacement by: nicotine gum, transdermal patch, oral 
inhaler, nasal spray…
B. Bupropion: ↑DA → decreases craving. 
C. Varenicline: partial agonist at CNS nicotinic Ach receptors
D. Naltrexone: decreases craving and relapse
13. Less extrapyramidal side effects with risk of agranulocytosis may be 
seen with
A. Risperidone.
B. Thioridazine. 
C. Haloperidol
D. Clozapine.
E. Olanzapine
14. The following is correctly matched to its adverse effect
A. Clozapine/marked extrapyramidal side effects .
B. Olanzapine /agranulocytosis more common compared to clozapine.
C. Haloperidol/ conduction defects more common than thioridazine
D. Venlafaxine/hypertension more common.
E. Fluoxetine/prominent anticholinergic side effects
15. The following drug is 1st choice in treatment of psychosis in 
Parkinson disease
A. Haloperidol
B. Risperidone
C. Aripiprazole
D. Quetiapine
16. The following antipsychotic drug is preferred in children  
because it has less effect on cognitive function
A. Olanzapine
B. Aripiprazole
C. Quetiapine
D. Thioridazine
17. The following antipsychotic drug is preferred in children 
suffering from autism
A. Olanzapine
B. Aripiprazole
C. Quetiapine
D. Thioridazine
18.The following  is not preferred indication for chlorpromazine
A. Intractable hiccup
B. Severe vomiting
C. Tranquilizer in agitation
D. Autism
19. The following antipsychotic drug has the least central side effect 
especially extrapyramidal side effects.
A. Haloperidol
B. Clozapine
C. Aripiprazole
D. Chlorpromazine
20. The following is not adverse effect of lithium carbonate
A. Ataxia & tremors
B. Polyurea & theorist
C. Hyperthyroidism
D. Renal tubular damage
1=B 2=C 3=D 4=A 5=B
6=A 7=B 8=B 9=B 10=A
11=C 12=E 13=D 14=D 15=D
16=B 17=B 18=D 19=B 20=C
ANSWER KEY


Pharmacology 
MCQ 
CNS & Special Senses Module
p2022-2023 
• Part 1: Opioid Drugs 
• Part 2: Antiparkinsonian 
drugs  
2022-2023 
 
 
 
Page 
| 1 
27 MCQs         Opioid analgesics 
1. All the following are involved in the...mechanism of action of morphine Except  
A. Most effects are mediated by activation of kappa receptors. 
B. Inhibition of calcium influx resulting in inhibition of transmitter release. 
C. Increase in K outflux resulting in hyperpolarization of neuronal membrane. 
D. Reduction of emotional response to pain. 
2. Indications of morphine do not include: 
A. Analgesic in cancer pain. 
B. Acute pulmonary edema in acute left ventricular failure & myocardial infarction 
C. In anesthesia 
D. Severe pain following head injury. 
3. Most serious adverse effect/s of morphine 
A. Dependence. 
B. Respiratory depression. 
C. Hypertension.
  
D. A and B 
E. B and C 
4. Constipation associated with the use of morphine may be relieved by: 
A. Docusate. C. Codeine. 
B. loperamide. D. Diphenoxylate. 
5. The following is not common between pethidine & tramadol: 
A. Analgesics. 
B. Action completely reversed by naloxone. 
C. Less respiratory depression than morphine. 
D. Increase risk of convulsions with high doses. 
6. Neuropathic pain may be managed by 
A. Tricyclic antidepressants.   
B. Carbamazepine  
C. Gabapentin 
D. Tramadol 
E.  All of the above 
 
 
7. The following is not true concerning codeine: 
A. Inhibits cough center in medulla. 
B. Less potent antitussive than morphine. 
C. Diarrhea is a troublesome side effect. 
D. Analgesic. 
8. The following is not common between pethidine & buprenorphine: 
A. Analgesic effect in severe pain. 
B. Respiratory depression is increased by increasing dose. 
C. Nausea & vomiting. 
D. Constipation 
9. Pethidine differs from morphine in all the following Except: 
A. It is preferred for long term treatment of chronic pain 
B. It is less liable to cause asphyxia neonatorum 
C. It is less liable to cause biliary colic 
D. It has atropine like action. 
10. The following concerning naloxone is not correct: 
A. Has a shorter half -life than its agonist. 
B. Given orally. 
C. Given in anesthesia to reverse CNS depression of its agonist. 
D. It is a specific antagonist to opioid receptors. 
11. Which of the following is an opioid used in management of heroin withdrawal? 
A. Buspirone. 
B. Bupropion. 
C. Buprenorphine. 
D. Bromocriptine. 
12. Neuroleptanalgesia may be induced by 
A. Fentanyl / Midazolam 
B. Midazolam /Droperidol 
C. Fentanyl /Domperidone 
D. Fentanyl /Droperidol 
13. Conscious sedation may be induced by 
A. Fentanyl / Midazolam 
B. Midazolam /Droperidol 
C. Fentanyl /Domperidone 
D. None of the above 
Page 
| 2 
 
 
 
Page 
| 3 
14. The following analgesic is not recommended to be taken in renal failure or 
more than 48 hours for fear of convulsion (toxicity) 
A. Morphine 
B. Tramadol 
C. Meperidine 
D. Codeine 
15. In moderate pain due to inflammation ( arthritis)the following analgesic is 
recommended 
A. Morphine 
B. Ibuprofen 
C. Tramadol 
D. Buprenorphine 
16. The following IS not strong pure opioid agonist  
A. Morphine 
B. Pethidine 
C. Propoxyphene 
D. Fentanyl 
17. The following is NOT contraindication for morphine 
A. Head injuries 
B. Enlarged prostate 
C. Acute myocardial infarction 
D. Biliary colic 
18. The following opioid drug is matched to its indication  
A. Loperamide/antidiarrheal & analgesic 
B. Dextromethorphan / Antitussive & Analgesic 
C. Morphine/ Analgesic & Antitussive 
D. Codeine / Analgesic & antitussive 
19.  long term use leads to tolerance for all actions of morphine except: 
A. Analgesic effect 
B. Respiratory depression 
C. Constipation 
D. Hypotension 
 
 
20. The following is a WRONG statement about opioid drugs 
A. Methadone may prolong QT interval and precipitate torsade de point  
B. High doses of fentanyl may precipitate chest wall rigidity and decreased 
ventilation  
C. Pethidine is used in chronic moderate to severe pain including labor 
pain and biliary colic 
D. Buprenorphine is uses alternative to Methadone in treatment of opioid 
addiction. 
21. The following is WRONG statement about Tramadol 
A. Analgesic by inhibition uptake of 5HT (serotonin) and Norepinephrine 
B. Weak Mu agonist & partially antagonized by naloxone 
C. Less addiction, respiratory depression and convulsion than morphine 
D. Used as analgesic in postoperative pain as well as neuropathic pain 
22. Buprenorphine: choose the INCORRECT statement 
A. Partial Mu receptor agonist 
B. Respiratory depression is not increased by increasing its dose 
C. Long acting and available sublingually in treatment of opioid addiction 
D. Can be given with morphine to enhance its analgesic effect 
23. The following opioid drug should be avoided in patient taking MAOI 
A. Morphine 
B. Fentanyl 
C. Meperidine (Pethidine) 
D. Codeine 
24. Heroin: choose the INCORRECT statement 
A. Diacetyl morphine and converted to morphine in CNS 
B. Highly lipophilic with rapid onset of action 
C. Longer duration of action than morphine 
D. Not used clinically in most of countries 
25. Methadone: Choose the ICORRECT statement 
A. Used in detoxification and maintenance of opioid addicts 
B. Long acting & available orally with less withdrawal symptoms 
C. Less effective as analgesic than morphine 
D. Has risk of arrhythmia 
Page 
| 4 
 
 
 
Page 
| 5 
26. Fentanyl: Choose the INCORRECT statement 
A. More potent with shorter duration and rapid onset than morphine 
B. Preferred in anesthesia especially in cardiovascular surgery 
C. Used with Neuroleptic drugs (Droperidol) in conscious sedation 
D. Neurolept anesthesia is a combination neuroleptic drug, opioid drug & nitrous 
oxide in oxygen 
27. Pure opioid antagonists: choose the incorrect statement  
A. Naloxone is taken intravenously in acute morphine toxicity & in opioid induced 
neonatal apnea (asphyxia Neonatorum) 
B. Naltrexone should be given to opioid addict after full detoxification to avoid 
withdrawal symptoms 
C. Naltrexone is short duration and should be repeated in treatment of acute 
morphine toxicity 
D. Naltrexone is used as maintenance therapy to avoid relapse in opioid and alcohol 
addicts 
28. The following is true concerning opioids 
A. Inhibit potassium outflux from neuronal membrane. 
B. May be safely given in liver disease. 
C. Naloxone effectively blocks effects of tramadol. 
D. Pethidine is used in chronic moderate and severe pain. 
E. None of the above. 
  
1=A 2=D 3=D 4=A 5=B 6=E 7=C 
8=B 9=A 10=B 11=C 12=D 13=A 14=C 
15=B 16=C 17=C 18=D 19=C 20=C 21=C 
22=D 23=C 24=C 25=C 26=C 27=C 28=E 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 
| 6 
30 MCQs            Antiparkinsonian Drugs  
 
1. The advantage of adding bromocriptine to L-dopa is 
A. Activates D1 receptors improving the condition. 
B. Reduces the risk of psychosis of L-dopa. 
C. More effective than L-dopa. 
D. Longer t 1/2 & rapid absorption reducing fluctuations in L-dopa response. 
 
2. Which of the drugs listed does not reduce fluctuations in response to L-dopa: 
A. Benztropine 
B. Selegiline 
C. Entacapone 
D. Pramipexole 
 
3. Effects of selegiline in Parkinsonism do not include: 
A. Inhibits MAO-B. 
B. Sedative effective relieving insomnia of Parkinsonism. 
C. Used with L-dopa/ carbidopa to prolong its action. 
D. Decreases fluctuations in L- dopa response. 
 
4. Nausea and vomiting of L-dopa may be reduced without interference with 
its antiparkinsonian effect by coadministration of: 
A. Metoclopramide. 
B. Domperidone. 
C. Carbidopa. 
D. B and C. 
 
5. The following adverse effect of L-dopa is not minimized by carbidopa: 
A. Involuntary movements (dyskinesia). 
B. Nausea & vomiting. 
C. Arrhythmia. 
D. Postural hypotension. 
 
6. The following concerning antiparkinsonian drugs is/are CORRECT?  
A. Apomorphine is given subcutaneously in emergency. 
B. L-dopa- induced dyskinesia is reduced by carbidopa. 
C. Benztropine reduces fluctuations in response to L-dopa. 
D. Amantadine may induce insomnia. 
E. A and D. 
 
 
 
 
Page 
| 7 
7. The following drug does not increase dopaminergic activity in the brain 
A. L dopa 
B. Bromocriptine 
C. Benztropine 
D. Selegiline 
 
8. The following statement is WRONG as regard L-Dopa 
A. Dopamine precursor that can cross BBB by active uptake 
B. Should be given with peripheral decarboxylase enzyme inhibitor 
C. Improves all symptoms especially bradykinesia 
D. Should be given as early as possible in Parkinson disease 
 
9. The following adverse effects of L dopa so not exaggerated by adding 
carbidopa 
A. Dyskinesia 
B. Hallucination 
C. Vomiting 
D. Confusion 
 
10. The following is NOT contraindication to L-dopa therapy 
A. Active peptic ulcer 
B. Glaucoma 
C. Malignant melanoma 
D. Psychosis 
E. Hypertension 
 
11. All the following are expected adverse effects of L-dopa therapy except 
A. Postural hypotension 
B. Neuroleptic malignant syndrome 
C. Choro athetotic movements 
D. Akinesia 
E. Tremors 
12.  All the following drugs improve the effect of L-dopa except: 
A. Carbidopa 
B. Vitamin B6 
C. Selegiline 
D. Entacapone 
E. Amantadine 
 
13.  The following antiparkinsonian drug is not properly matched with its adverse effect: 
A. L-dopa causes end of dose akinesia 
B. Amantadine causes hallucinations & insomnia 
C. Seligiline carries low risk of cheese reaction 
D. Pramipexol causes cardiac fibrosis 
E. Bromocriptine can cause vasospasm 
14.  A Parkinson patient already on L-Dopa/ carbidopa, started to experience several 
adverse drug reactions. Which of the following is an adverse reaction that was not 
diminished by carbidopa? 
A. Skin pigmentation 
B. Nausea & vomiting 
C. Dyskinesia 
D. Arrythmia 
E. Postural hypotension 
15.  A 45 year old patient on chlorpromazine (a typical antipsychotic) for 4 years, came 
to the neurology clinic complaining of tremors at rest. He was diagnosed as 
parkinsonism & drug A was added to chlorpromazine to control his complaint. Which 
of the following could be drug A? 
A. Amantadine 
B. L-dopa/carbidopa 
C. Benztropine 
D. Pramipexol  
E. Selegiline 