c. Sensory supply of the pharynx: - Nasopharynx: maxillary nerve “pharyngeal branch of pterygopalatine 
ganglion” - Oropharynx: glossopharyngeal nerve “sensory branch that joins the 
pharyngeal plexus” - Laryngopharynx: vagus nerve “internal laryngeal branch of superior 
laryngeal nerve” 
Motor supply: by pharyngeal plexus that is formed of 
1. pharyngeal branch of vagus 
2. pharyngeal branch of glossopharyngeal nerve 
3. pharyngeal branch of superior cervical sympathetic ganglion  
“this plexus lies on middle constrictor muscle” 
                     a.  From your anatomical knowledge, explain the reason of the husky voice  . 
b.  Enumerate the veins draining the thyroid gland and their termination. 
Answer   
                    a.    lesion of External Laryngeal nerve 
                    b.  - Superior thyroid vein: terminates in Internal Jugular vein. - Middle thyroid vein: terminates in Internal Jugular vein. 
 - Inferior Thyroid vein: terminates in Lt brachiocephalic vein   
  
 
15 
 
Question 1:A teenager girl discovered loss of sensation of her right hand and on 
examination the doctor discovered loss of pain and temperature of distal part of the 
upper limb. Also, there was diminished pain and temperature on left hand. The 
condition was diagnosed as cavitations of the spinal cord. 
Question 2:A lady 55 years old, developed right sided hemiplegia mainly in the upper 
limb due to cerebrovascular accident as proved by MRl. The lesion affects the frontal 
and parietal lobes.  
 
OR :An old man had right side hemiplegia sparing the distal part of lower limb 
following a stroke. Neurological examination & investigation diagnosed intracerebral 
hemorrhage that interrupted the blood supply to the frontal and parietal lobes. 
 
 
 
 
 
a. What is your diagnosis? 
b. Why the pain and temperature fibers are only involved in this case?  
c. Where is the most common site for such condition? 
 
Answer 
 
a. Diagnosis:The case suffers from syringomyelia. 
b. Pain and temperature fibers are only involved: 
Because their fibers decussate to the opposite side just in front of the central canal of  
spinal cord (lateral spinothalamic tract), so the cavitations around the central canal  
will affect them only.  
c. The most common site : is in cervical and upper thoracic segments of spinal cord. 
 
 
 
a. Which vessel was affected in this case?  
b. List the name and location of the functional areas of the parietal lobe. 
c. If the patient is right handed, do you expect the affection of speech? State why? 
 
 
NEURO 
  
 
16 
 
Question3: An old man starts to develop headache & by MRI proved to have tumors 
of the medial geniculate body. 
Answer 
 
a. The vessel affected was Left Middle cerebral artery. (MCA) 
The functional areas of the parietal lobe: 
 2 sensory areas:  
1. First somatosensory area (SI): in postcentral gyrus and posterior part of 
paracentral gyrus. 
2. Second somatosensory area (SII), area 43 for taste: in superior lip of posterior 
ramus of lateral sulcus. 
 2 parietal lobules: 
1. Superior parietal lobule and area 5,7: for sterognosis 
2. Inferior parietal lobule: in supramarginal gyrus and angular gyrus (areas 40 & 39 
respectively)  
b. If the patient is right handed,speech will be affected. 
Because middle cerebral artery supplies speech areas, for a right handed person, the 
speech areas (wernicke’s and Broca’s) will be in the left hemisphere and supplied by left 
MCA which is affected in this case. 
 
 
 
 
a. Where is the medial geniculate 
body located? 
b. Where do its efferent fibers 
project to? 
Answer 
a. Medial geniculate body is 
located in the posterior part of 
the inferior surface of thalamus 
b. Efferent fibers project to: 
Auditory radiation to auditory 
area of the cortex . 
   : قال اإلمام الشافعى
  شكوت الى وكيع ِ سوء حفظ
ى فأرشدنى الى ترك المعاص
ى و أخبرنى بأن العلم نورٌر
  و نور َّللا ال يهدى لعااِ
 
  
 
17 
 
Question 4:A mother brought her two month old baby to the doctor complaining 
that he has a large head . MRI confirmed hydrocephalus with enlarged lateral 
ventricles . 
Question 5: A teenager girl fell from a height. On examination the doctor discovered 
loss of sensation of the whole lower limbs and up to level of umbilicus. Also there 
was paralysis of both lower limbs. 
 
a.  where do you expect the obstruction to the flow of CSF exists ? 
b.  Describe the formation and flow of cerebro-spinal fluid (CSF) . 
c.  Describe the flow of blood from the superior sagittal sinus to the outside of the skull . 
Answer  
a.   the obstruction to the flow of CSF is at interventricular foramen of monro . 
b.   the formation of CSF :  
        1. Choroid plexuses of the ventricles  
        2. Little from epindyma lining the ventricles  
The flow of CSF :  
Lateral ventricle → interventricular foramen of monro → 3rd  ventricle → aqueduct  
        of sylvius → 4th ventricle → foramen of magendi and foramina of luscka →  
aubarachnoid space around brain or around spinal cord  
 
c. The flow of blood from superior sagittal sinus → confluence of sinuses → right  
transverse sinus → right sigmoid sinus → right internal jagular vein  
 
What is your diagnosis? 
 
a. Mention the level of spinal cord segment affected. 
b. Enumerate the arterial supply of spinal cord. 
Answer 
a. Diagnosis:Complete Transection of the cord below T1 segment.  
b. Level affected: Below T1 segment (T10 segment is the affected one). 
c. Arterial supply of spinal cord: - Anterior spinal artery.  - Posterior spinal arteries.  - Radicular arteries.  
 
  
 
18 
 
Question 6 :A 60 year old female complained of a sudden disturbance in gait , 
intension tremors , ptosis of right eyelid , decreased sweating on right side of face , 
decreased pain sensation on right of face , difficulty in swallowing . pain sensation 
was decreased on the left side of the body . A diagnosis of lateral medullary 
syndrome was made  
 
 
a. What causes of the syndrome ? 
b. Analyse each of the patient symptoms .  
Answer 
   a.  Damage of the lateral part of the medulla due to occlusion of the posterior 
inferior  
cerebellar artery  
b.  • Sudden disturbance in gait and intension tremors due to affection of  
spinocerebellar tract and inferior cerebellar peduncle  
  • ptosis of the right eyelid due to affection of the descending sympathetic fibers( 
ipsilateral horner’s syndrome )  
  • Decreased sweating on the right side ( ipsilateral horner’s syndrome)  
  • Decreased pain sensation on the right side of the face due to affection of spinal   
nucleus and tract of trigeminal . 
   • Difficulty in swallowing due to affection of the nucleus ambiguis( ipsilateral  
paralysis of palate and pharynx )  
    • Decreased pain sensation on the left side of the body due to affection of spinal  
liminiscus or lat. Spinothalamic tract  
( loss of pain from the opposite side of the   body ) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
19 
 
Question 8:An old man starts to develop headache & by MRI Proved to have tumor at 
the cerebellopontine angle. 
Question 7:A lady 55 years old developed right sided hemiplegia together with 
affection of lower 7 & 12 cranial nerves due to cerebrovascular accident. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a. Where is the site of lesion?  
b. Which vessel is most likely affected?  
c. Enumerate different parts of affected area  
 
Answer 
 
a. UMNL in part of area 4 of left hemisphere. 
b. Middle cerebral artery. 
Area 4 contain map of contralateral half of body represented upside down so tongue & face 
in lower part in lateral surface, foot & legs in para central lobule in medial  
 
 
 
a. What is the 1st cranial nerve to be affected by this tumor? 
b. Enumerate the symptoms resulting from the compression of that nerve.  
Answer  
a. The first cranial nerve to be affected is 7th (facial nerve)  
b. Its lesion causes facial paralysis  
 Effect on muscles: 
 Orbicularis oculi: so the patient can't close his eye strongly. 
 Buccinator muscle: so the patient can't blowing or whistle. 
 Orbicularis oris: so the patient has a problem with speech. 
 Platysma: so the patient can't express sadness. 
 Occipito-frontalis: so has a problem with raising his eyebrows. 
 
 
Concerning sensation: Loss of all sensations in face except the area over the 
parotid and angle of mandible 
  
 
20 
 
Question9 : A 70-year-old man suddenly developed right sided hemiplegia with 
aphasia, he could move his foot weakly but was unable to close his fist at all on the 
affected side. Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) proved the occurrence of cerebral 
embolism. 
Question 10:A 25-year-old patient had an operation under spinal anesthesia. During 
recovery, he could not feel the back of his lower limb with difficulty in climbing the 
stairs by the right foot. 
 
a. Which cerebral artery is likely occluded? Explain 
b. Locate the speech areas that you know. Mention their functions . 
Answer 
a. The cerebral artery  occluded: 
Middle cerebral artery:  
Runs in lat sulcus & insula to reach superiolateral surface. So supply motor/superior 
area of contralateral limb + speech + auditory /visual centers so occluded in 
dominant hemisphere cause (hemiplegia-aphasia) 
b. Speech areas: 
1. Broca’s area (frontal lobe): receive data from Wernicke & programed sequence 
of ms contractions to produce intelligible words & project these order to area 4  
2. Wernicke’s (parietal-temporal lobes): understand of visual /auditory 
information &select suitable words &send them to broca’s to produce speech  
3. Supplementary motor area (frontal lobe): superior speech center  
a. If the site of lumbar puncture was correct and the spinal cord was not injured, what 
else could have been injured? 
b. Where is the correct site for doing a lumbar puncture? 
c. Where does the spinal cord normally end in such a patient? 
d. What is the level of termination of the spinal meninges? 
Answer  
a. Other structure could have been injured:  
Cauda equine (collection of spinal nerves) 
b. The correct site for doing a lumbar puncture is just above or below tip of 4th 
lumbar spine opposite an imaginary line connecting the highest points of iliac crests 
c. The spinal cord normally end opposite to disc between L1 & L2 
d. Level of termination of the spinal meninges: 
Dura & arachnoid: opposite S2 
Pia: continue as filum terminale pierce tube of Dura&arachnoid then attached to 
back of coccyx . 
  
 
21 
 
Question 13:A surgeon performing an appendectomy (removal of the appendix) 
found many adhesions as he opened the patient's abdomen. He tried to find the base 
of the appendix but it was difficult. 
Question 12 :A 50-year-old suddenly developed loss of sensation and weakness in 
her right hand. 
 
 
  a. Occlusion of which cerebral artery can cause this ? Explain. 
  b.   Where does this artery arise from ? 
   c.    What are the deep structures supplied by its central branches ? 
Answer  
 
a.   Left middle cerebral artery (MCA) →  The MCA supplies the motor & the sensoryareas 
of the contralateral upper limb. 
          b.  It's the larger terminal branch of the internal carotid artery (ICA). 
          c.   - Posterior part of caudate. - Lentiform nucleus. - Internal capsule (upper 1/2 of ant. & post. limbs). 
a. With your anatomical knowledge, can you recommend a way to find the base of the 
appendix? 
b. What is the most common position for the appendix? 
c. Describe the surface anatomy of the vermiform appendix  
d. While operating, the surgeon cut through muscle fibers directed downward, 
forwards and medially. Name this muscle.  
e. Why is appendicular pain felt first around the umbilicus then shifts to the right iliac 
fossa 
Answer  
a. The base of appendix is2 cm below iliocecal junction. 
b. The most common position is retrocecal 65% of people 
c. Surface anatomy of vermiform appendix: 
Mcburney's point at the junction of the lateral 1
3
and the medial 2
3
 of the line  
extending between A.S.I.S and the umbilicus. 
d. The muscle is External abdominal muscle 
ABDOMEN 
  
 
22 
 
Question 14:In an operation for treatment of chronic gastric ulcer, it was found that 
the posterior wall of the patient's stomach was stuck to his posterior abdominal wall. 
Question 15: A young man during a quarrel got a transverse cut wound of the 
anterior abdominal wall just above the umbilicus and to the left. He put his hand on 
the wound and found part of his intestine coming out of the wound. 
 
e. Appendicular pain:inacute appendicitis pain is conveyed from appendix by 
sympathetic fibers to T10 segment of spinal cord (skin around the umbilicus)  
later sever painin the right iliac fossa results from irritation of parietal peritoneum 
at right iliac fossa . 
a. Which structures lie behind the stomach and can be involved in the disease? 
b. Name a large artery that runs behind the stomach and maybe eroded by the chronic 
ulcer?  
c. Enumerate the arteries which supply the stomach? 
 
Answer 
a. The stomach bed (left kidney and left suprarenal gland, ant surface of pancreas, left 
crus of diaphragm, transverse mesocolon) 
b. The artery is splenic artery from the coeliac trunk  
c. Arteries supply the stomach: Left and right gastric, left and right gastroepiploic & 
short gastric . 
  
 
 
 
a. Which parts of the intestine can protrude through this wound “based on the site of 
the wound”? 
b. What other structures “other than intestine” may protrude through this wound? 
c. How can the doctor identify the part of the intestine coming out of the wound? 
Answer  
 
a. Part of intestine can protrude: Jejunum (or descending colon.) 
b. Other structures may protrude: Parts of greater omentum, stomach. 
c. To identify part of intestine: 
 
 
  
 
23 
 
 Jejunum Ileum 
External features 
1. Diameter Wider Narrower 
2. Mesentery Transparent Opaque (Rich content of fat) 
3. Arterial arcades  
 
Simple arcades (1-3) 
Long Vasa Recta 
Complex arcades (3–8) 
Short Vasa Recta 
Internal features 
1. Plicae semilunaris More numerous Less 
2. Payers patches Absent Present 
 
Small intestine Large Intestine  
6 meters 1 meter Length 
Smaller Greater Caliber 
More mobile Less mobile or more fixed Mobility 
Mesentery for 
jejunum and ilium - Mesoappendix - Transverse mesocolon - Sigmoid colon 
Mesentery 
Absent Present but absent from 
caecum,vermiform appendix and 
rectum 
Appendices Epiloicae 
Absent Present Taeniae Coli 
Absent present Sacculations 
(Haustrations) 
 
  
  
 
24 
 
Question 16: An abscess in the anterior abdominal wall just below the umbilicus was 
discovered in a diabetic patient, causing pain and lymph node enlargement. 
Question 17: A 75 year old man with chronic cough noticed that a bulge was 
developing in his left groin. On examination, an elongated swelling was seen above 
the medial end of the left inguinal ligament. When the patient coughed, the swelling 
enlarged but did not descend into the scrotum. 
 
 
a. Which spinal cord segment receives pain from that area? 
b. Which group of lymph node is enlarged in that case? 
 
Answer 
a. The spinal segment is T10 
b. Lymph nodes enlarged: External iliac lymph nodes, common iliac lymph nodes, 
lateral aortic lymph nodes, cisterna chili and thoracic duct.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
a. What is the possible diagnosis of this swelling? 
b. Give reasons for your diagnosis   
c. Mention the  borders of the inguinal triangle   
d. Mention structures forming posterior wall of the inguinal canal  
Answer 
a. The diagnosis is left direct inguinal hernia. 
b. Reasons: Old age and chronic cough.  
c. The borders of inguinal triangle are: 
1. Medially: lateral border of the rectus abdominis 
2. Laterally: inferior epigastric artery 
3. Inferiorly: inguinal ligament 
d. Structures forming posterior wall of the inguinal canal: 
1. Fascia transversals: along its whole length  
2. Conjoint tendon: in its medial half  
3. Reflected part of the inguinal ligament  
  
 
25 
 
Question 18: A 32 year old woman presented to the physician with increasing loss 
of weight & vomiting. He noted that she was jaundiced & on examination a mass was 
palpable below the edge in the right upper quadrant. The diagnosis of cancer head of 
pancreas was made. 
Question 19:A young man developed severe abdominal colic especially around 
umbilicus that gradually shifts to right iliac fossa also there was fever and vomiting. 
 
a. What is the reason for jaundice? 
b. Enumerate anterior & posterior relations of neck of pancreas 
a. The reason of jaundice is obstruction of the common bile duct 
b. Anterior & posterior relations of neck: 
Anteriorly Posteriorly 
• pylorus of the stomach 
• gastroduodenal artery descends in 
front of the junction between the head 
& neck 
• Termination of superior mesenteric vein & 
splenic vein  & the beginning of the portal vein 
 
a. What is your diagnosis? 
b. Describe surface anatomy of affected structure 
c. Mention four different sites of the different structure 
d. What is the source of its blood supply? 
 
Answer 
 
a. Diagnosis:Acute Appendicitis. 
b. Surface anatomy:The base of appendix is represented on the anterior abdominal 
wall by McBureys point which lies at junction of lateral 1
3
 and medial 2
3
 of a line 
extend between right anterior superior iliac spine and umbilicus. 
c. Different sites:Pelvic, sub caecal, pre ileal& post ileal. 
d. Blood supply: Appendicular artery branch of ileocolic artery. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
26 
 
Question 20:A male farmer patient 35 years old, presented severe bloody vomiting. 
Question 21: A 27 years old man was admitted to the surgical ward with 
hematemesis (vomiting blood). After resuscitation, clinical investigations had 
diagnosed portal hypertension. 
 
 
 
 
a. What is the possible reason of that case? 
b. Mention the anatomical base of this condition? 
Answer 
a. Possible reason: Portal hypertension, esophageal varices, varicose veins 
b. Anatomical base:Esophagus is partly supplied by portal circulation and partly by 
systemic (tributaries of left gastric vein (portal) connect with esophageal tributaries 
of the azygous and accessory hemiazygous veins (systemic)) engorgement of these 
anastomotic veins may result in varices and even fatal hematemesis (vomiting of 
blood). 
N.B. :  It can also be due to ulcer in posterior wall of stomach because it can erode splenic  
artery causing hemorrhage. 
 
a. Explain the cause of hematemesis in this case. 
b. List other site(s) could be involved in such case. 
c. Describe formation, course & termination of the portal vein. 
Answer  
a. Cause of hematemesis: portal hypertension “open of Porto systemic shunt” (which 
is esophageal varices in this case)  
b. Other site could be involved:  - In the wall of the rectum and anal canal(Superior rectal vein & middle and 
inferior rectal vein) - At the umbilicus (para umbilical vein &superficial epigastric)→CAPUT 
MEDUSAE - Bare area of liver (veins inside the liver & veins of the diaphragm) - posterior abdominal wall( colic veins & posterior abdominal wall) - Inside the liver (left portal branch& inferior vena cava ) 
  
 
27 
 
Question 22:A 40-year old lady developed pain in the right shoulder. Her doctor 
noticed that she feels pain when he touches a certain point in the upper right part of 
her abdomen.  
She had ultrasonography that showed the presence of multiple small gall bladder 
stones. After few months she developed obstructive jaundice. 
c. Formation: union of splenic vein and superior mesenteric vein at the level of 
L2behind neck of pancreas  
Course:ascend in 2 regions  : 
1. behind 1st part duodenum where bile duct & gastro duodenal artery are anterior 
to it and the I.V.C is posterior to it  
2. In the free border of lesser oumentum the bile duct & hepatic artery are anterior 
to it and epiploic foramen I behind separating it from I.V.C 
Termination: divide into left & right portal branches in porta hepatis 
( end like an artery) 
 
a. Explain the pain in the right shoulder. 
b. Locate the point of maximum pain in the abdomen in this patient. 
c. What is the length of the common bile duct? 
d. Describe the course and termination of the common bile duct 
Answer 
a. Due to irritation of the phrenic nerves which supplies the skin above the shoulder 
C4, 5 . 
b. Tip of the right 9th costal cartilage. 
c. 7.5 cm . 
d. Descends in the free border of lesser omentum anterior to the epiploic foramen  
It passes behind the 1st part of duodenum and then runs in the groove on the 
posterior surface of the head of pancreas to the left of the descending part  of 
duodenum 
It reaches the main pancreatic duct& they unite together to form the 
hepatopancreatic ampulla(ampulla of water) which open in the descending part 
of duodenum through the major duodenal papilla. 
 
  
 
28 
 
Question 23:A 40-year-old man discovered a swelling in his right grion that bulges 
out on coughing. His doctor noticed that the swelling did not reach the scrotum. He 
also noticed and old appendicectomy scar. He told the patient that a fault in the 
appendicectomy might have caused his grion swelling. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 a. From your anatomical knowledge, which type of inguinal hernia the patient is  
having? Explain the reason for your diagnosis. 
 b.  What had probably been injured during the appendicectomy? How could it lead to  
this hernia? 
Answer 
  a.   Direct inguinal hernia →  Because it bulges by pushing the fascia trans; but never  
descends to the scrotum. 
  b.    The iliohypogastric& the ilioinginal nerves (L1). → As they supply the internal  
oblique & the transversus abdominis muscles that form the conjoint tendon (The  
strongest part of the posterior wall of inguinal canal support the weak medial  
part of it 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
It’s literally  
true that you 
succeed  
by helping others to 
 succeed 
 
 
  
 
29 
 
Question 1: A 55 years old male presented with severe pain at anal orifice with mild 
bleeding during defecation. The condition was diagnosed as fissure and piles. 
 
Question 2:A 16 year old boy was riding his bicycle when his foot slipped off the 
pedal and his perineum hit the bar of the bicycle. An hour later, he was admitted to 
the hospital unable to micturate. On examination, he had extensive swelling of his 
penis and scrotum. A diagnosis of ruptured urethra was made.  
 
 
 
 
 
a. Name the nerve that carries the pain from anal canal 
b. Which vessels are bleeding? 
c. Describe the beginning direction and length of anal canal . 
Answer 
a. The nerve that carries the pain: 
Inferior rectal nerve (pudendal) 
b. The bleeding vessel: 
Bleeding vessels are tributaries of superior rectal vein , these tributaries are present 
within pile which a is mucous fold containing that dilated tributary of superior 
rectal vein these tributaries drain to external rectal venous plexus 
External rectal (perimuscular venous plexus which lies outside the external anal 
sphincter and communicates with internal plexus) 
c. Anal canal:  
It begins at rectoanal junction one inch below and infront of tip of coccyx.  
It is directed downwards and backwards from rectoanal junction to anus  
It is about 2.5-4 cmin length. 
 
 
 
 
a. Which part of urethra is more liable to injury? 
b. Name the striated muscle surrounding the membranous urethra. 
c. Describe the features of the mucosa posterior wall of the prostatic urethra. 
d. Mention the lymph nodes that drain the different parts of the male urethra 
Answer 
 
PELVIS 
  
 
30 
 
Question 3: A 55 years old male presented with severe abdominal pain and absolute 
constipation. On examination there was a tumor at lower part of rectum. 
 
a. The part of urethra more liable to injury: penile part at its junction with the 
membranous part of the urethra is more liable to injury  
b. The striated muscle is sphincter urethrae (external urethral sphincter): formed 
of superficial part and deep part, it represents the voluntary control of the 
urethra. which surrounds the membranous part of the urethra. 
c. Features of the mucosa: 
1. Midline longitudinal ridge “urethral crest”. 
2. Shallow depression on either side of the crest “prostatic sinus”. 
3. Orifices of prostatic ducts. 
4. Colliculus seminalis in the middle of the urethral crest. 
5. Openings of the ejaculatory ducts. 
d. Lymph nodes of male urethra: 
1. prostatic and membranous urethra →internal and external iliac lymph nodes 
2. spongy urethra → deep inguinal lymph nodes and few pass to superficial 
inguinal lymph nodes & some to external iliac lymph nodes  
 
a. What is the length of the rectum? 
b. Describe different curves of the rectum. 
c. Explain the venous drainage of rectum. 
 
Answer 
The length of rectum: 12cm 
a. Curves of the rectum: - Anteroposterior: 
 Sacral: concave anteriorly 
 Perineal: convex anteriorly at the rectoanal junction - Lateral: 
 Upper& lower: concave to the left 
 Middle: concave to the right 
b. Venous drainage of rectum: - Superior rectal vein drains the internal rectal venous plexus, then continues as  
inferior mesenteric vein “portal circulation” - Middle rectal vein drains the musculosa into the internal iliac vein “ systemic 
circulation). 
  
 
31 
 
Question 4:A 60-year-old man observed fresh blood on passing stools. On rectal 
examination, the doctor discovered cancer rectum. 
Question 5:while riding a bicycle, a 24-year-old man fell and his perineum hit the 
bar of the bicycle strongly. Later, he did not pass urine, few drops of blood passed 
out from his external urethral meatus and painful swelling of his lower part of the 
anterior abdominal wall that did not extend into the thighs was noticed. A diagnosis 
of ruptured urethra was made. 
. 
 
a. If the cancer spreads anteriorly, which structures may be invaded?  
b. Which artery causes bleeding of the cancer is limited to the mucosa?  
c. If the cancer spreads along lymphatics, which groups may be involved? 
 
Answer 
a. Structures may be invaded:urinary bladder or prostate  
b. Artery causes bleeding limited to the mucosa: superior rectal artery  
c. The lymphatics involved: along superior rectal vessels (inferior mesenteric lymph 
nodes), and along middle rectal vessels (internal iliac lymph nodes). 
 
 
a. Which part of urethra is likely injured?  
b. What prevents extension of the swelling down the thighs?  
c. Name three other sites where the swelling would extend to. 
 
Answer 
 
a. The part of urethra injured penile part  
b. Extension of swelling is prevented by attachment of deep fascia “Scarp’s” with 
inguinal ligament and also fusion of deep fascia with fascia lata prevent urine from 
going downward. 
c. Swelling would extend to (in rupture spongy urethra): 
1. Sides of abdomen till the lumber fascia 
2. Scrotum 
3. Around the penis  
 
 
Consider Membranous urethra  if the case 
id fracture pelvis + urine is collected in 
deep perineal pouch = deep extravasation 
NOT  superficial extravasation  
  
 
32 
 
1. Question 1:A mother of a 3-year-old female child, discovered that her umbilicus is 
wet with urineferoussecretion. 
 
2. Question 2:A 22-year-old female consulted a plastic surgeon about the presence of 
multiple holes along ant. Border of sternocliedomastoid muscle 
 
 
 
 
a. What is your diagnosis? 
b. Describe in short the embryological sources of urinary bladder? 
c. From where the female urethra develop? 
 
Answer 
a. Diagnosis:Patenturachus (urachal fistula) at which the lumen of the allantois does 
not constrict and urine drains from umbilicus  
b. Embryological sources of urinary bladder: - The epithelium of urinary bladder develops from:  - The endoderm of the vesical portion of the primitive urogenital sinus forms most of 
the bladder except the trigone - The mesoderm of the absorbed lower ends of the mesonephric ducts forms the 
trigon.  However by time, the mesodermal lining of the trigone is replaced by 
endoderm that spreads from the rest of the bladder. - The rest of the bladder wall is derived from the surrounding splanchnic mesoderm 
c. Female urethra:In female the whole urethra develops from the vesical portion of the 
primitive urogenital sinus 
a. Name this congenital anomaly?  
b. From where the external auditory meatus develops?  
c. From where the thymus gland develops? 
 
Answer 
 
a. Congenital anomaly:Branchial (fistulas) the patient has (holes) and not (swellings) 
SPECIAL EMBRYOLOGY 
  
 
33 
 
3. Question 3:Define rachischisis. Give 3 anomalies arises through development of 
the spinal cord . 
 
Question 4:A mother of a 3year-old female child discover that her umbilicus is wet 
with fecal fluid. 
 
b. External auditory meatus: From 1st pharyngeal cleft, not pouch. The 1st pharyngeal 
pouch gives (auditory tube and the lining of the tympanic cavity and mastoid antrum 
and inner side of tympanic membrane. 
c. Thymus gland: From ventral part of 3rd and 4th pharyngeal pouches. 
 
Rachischisis is failure of the neural tube to close 
Anomalies arising during development of the spinal cord:  
a. Spina bifida occulta 
b. Meningocele 
c. Meningomyelocele  spina bifida cystica 
d. Rachischisis (myelocele) 
 
 
a. Describe in short this congenital anatomy &mention its embryological development 
b. Mention the dates of occurrence and reduction of physiological umbilical hernia 
Answer 
a. Congenital anatomy:Vitelline fistula (fecal fistula) in 2% to 4% of people a small 
portion of the vitelline duct persist forming an out pocketing of the ileum this vitelline 
duct remains patent over its entire length forming a direct communication between the 
umbilicus  and the intestinal tract. 
b. Occurrence: during the 6th week of development  
Reduction: during the 10th week .  
 
  
 
34 
 
Question 6:A married couple brought their one-year-old child to the doctor 
complaining that his right scrotum was empty while the left side contained testis. 
The doctor searched the superficial sites that could probably contain the missing 
testis. 
 
Question 5:A 22-year-old female developed cystic swelling undercover of the 
anterior border of sternocleidomastoid muscle . 
 a.  Name the congenital anatomy . 
b.  Describe how it develops ?  
c. from where the superior parathyroid gland develops ?  
 
Answer  
a.  branchial cyst  
b. due to failure of obliteration of the cervical sinus. (it is branchial cyst and not 
thyroglossal cyst). 
c.  from dorsal part of 4th haryngeal pouch 
 
 
a.If none of the examined sites contained the testis, what is the likely diagnosis?  
Whatwould be the diagnosis be if the testis was found in any of these sites (for  
example, in the root of the penis)? 
b.   What is the role of gubernaculum in either cases? 
c.     List two more sites that the doctor searched. 
Answer 
a.   - Un-descended testis: the testis will be found in the normal passage of descent. - Mal-descended testis: abnormal descent of the testis to un usual sites. 
b.   - un-descended testis: the gubernaculum is attached to its normal place in the base of  
the scrotum. - mal-descended testis: the gubenacuclum is attached to abnormal sites other than the  
base of the scrotum. 
c.    - The perineum. - Femoral triangle. 
   تم بحمم م
م
 
 
 Sensory Questions Dr.Mohamed Fayez 
1) Mention mechanism of Pain control ? 
2) What is type of sensation lost in Syringomyelia  ? 
3) Mention Extracranial causes of headache  ? 
4) Explain cause of Stamping Gait in Tabes dorsalis? 
5) What is center of stereognosis ? 
6) Explain why fast pain is lost before slow pain in Tabes dorsalis ? 
7) What are sensations lost in Right hemisection of spinal cord (Contralateral) at the same site of 
lesion ? 
8) Mention the disease in which pain is felt as if it is a bullet ? 
9) Mention the disease in which pupil doesn't constrict with light but constricts with Accomodation, 
and explain why  ? 
Model answers (Sensory) Dr.Mohamed Fayez 
1) Presynaptic Inhibition 
2) Jacket (Dissociated) sensory loss 
3) Hypertension, Nasal sinusitis, Errors of refraction 
4) Loss of proprioception due to inflammation of Dorsal root ganglia 
5) Somatic Association cortex 
6) Due to inflammation of Dorsal root compressing Myelinated nerves (A Delta fibers) 
7) Pain, Temperature 
8) Thalamic syndrome 
9) Tabes dorsalis due to damage of pretectal nucleus (Center of light reflex) by spirochate virus, while 
Superior colliculus (Center of Near vision is intact) 
Motor Questions Dr.Mohamed Fayez: 
1) What is the difference between Negative stretch reflex and Inverse stretch reflex regarding Stimulus and 
response? 
2) Mention importance of Jendrassik maneuver ? 
3) Mention the difference in function between Putamen and Caudate circuit? 
4) Explain the cause of Alpha rigidity in Parkinsonism ? 
5) Define static tremors and explain it's cause ? 
6) Mention 2 tracts controlling Flexors of upper limb? 
7) Mention cause of dorsiflextion of big toe without fanning of other toes ? 
8) Explain one cause of hyper reflexia in chronic UMNL ? 
9) Define Nystagmus and it's cause ? 
10) Explain difference between Servoassistant and servocomparator function? 
11) Mention 2 signs in UMNL ? 
12) Mention one test to differentiate between Sensory and Motor ataxia ? 
13) Define Ataxia, explain cause of Trunkal ataxia ? 
14) Mention 2 structures which discharge unadjusted signals and how they are controlled ? 
15) Mention the function of Cerebrocerebellum ? 
16) Explain the cause of pendular knee jerk ? 
17) What is the difference between lead pipe and cog wheel rigidity ? 
18) Explain the cause of normoreflexia  in Parkinsonism? 
19) Define Motor Apraxia and it's cause ? 
20) Explain the co-ordination between Lateral and Medial corticospinal tract ? 
21) Explain Alpha Gamma coactivation ? 
22) Mention causes of Hypertonia? 
23) What is the cause of hypotonia in Acute UMNL ? 
24) Explain the role of GPI on the thalamus ? 
25) Explain Damping function in Motor point of view ? 
26) Mention the structure which has Intrinsic activity? 
27) What is the function of SMA ? 
28) Mention the site which puts the idea for voluntary movement? 
29) Mention an example for Disynaptic reflex and Explain its importance? 
30) Mention one polysynaptic reflex ? 
31) What is the cause of loss of superficial reflex in UMNL and LMNL ? 
32) What is the difference between Parkinsonism and Neocerebellar syndrome regarding Conversation? 
33) Explain the cause of Circumduction Gait in UMNL ? 
34) Mention the physiological relation between area 4 and area 6? 
35) Explain why the patient fails to stop his finger at the nose ? 
36)  Explain why Cerebellum is always excitatory? 
37) Mention one property not present in Stretch reflex ? 
38) What is the cause of Dysdiadochokinesia? 
39) What is the cause if the patient fails to swing his arm during walking? Mention the gait abnormality in 
this case ? 
40) Can you treat Parkinsonism by Dopamine administration ? 
41) Mention different types of Ataxia and cause of each type ? 
Motor Questions Answers: 
1) Negative stretch reflex 
Stimulus: Muscle contraction which is the end of normal stretch reflex (Decrease sensitivity of Muscle 
spindle) 
Response: Muscle relaxation 
Inverse stretch reflex: 
Stimulus: Marked stretch 
Response: Muscle Relaxation  
2) Importance: Distract the brain to decrease it's Inhibitory signals on AHC of the reflex. 
3) Putamen: planning program 
Caudate: Cognitive control 
4) Loss of inhibition of lentiform nucleus on Vestibular nucleus (Normally Vestibular nucleus sends alpha 
impulse on AHC of antigravity muscles) 
5) Static tremors appear during rest and disappears in exercise,                                                                       
cause: loss of control over the thalamus, so thalamus sends unadjusted signals to cortex to cause 
contraction of agonist then contraction of antagonist causing tremors. 
6) Lateral corticospinal and Rubrospinal tract 
7) Lesion in area 4 only 
8) Denervation hypersensitivity 
9) To and fro eye movement, cause: Vestibulocerebellum lesion 
10) Servoassistant: Function of stretch reflex (Load reflex), cortex sends Extra Gamma signals to contract 
periphery of Muscle spindle, causing more discharge from center of nuclear chain receptors on AHC to 
increase Alpha impulse, increasing muscle contraction to carry the load 
Servocomparator function: Function of Spinocerebellum which compares between Intended movement 
from cortex(Corticopontocerebellar tract) and actual movement from muscles, then it corrects the error 
from the cortex (Cerebellodentato thalamo cortical pathway) 
11) Clasp knife spasticity and Clonus 
12) Romberg test: positive in Sensory ataxia ا
ل
13) Ataxia: Incordination of voluntary movement in absence of muscle paralysis,                                          
Cause of Trunkal ataxia is Lesion in Vestibulocerebellum 
14) Cortex: Controlled by Damping function of stretch reflex 
Thalamus: controlled by Basal Ganglia circuits (Balance between Direct pathway is excitatory and Indirect 
pathway: Inhibitory) 
15) Planning of next movement, not concerned with the ongoing movement 
16) Lesion in Cerebrocerebellum (Leading to hypotonia) which results in pendular knee reflex 
18) cause: Alpha rigidity which increases tone in agonist and antagonist muscle (The same), so it will cancel 
each other while doing the reflex 
19) Motor Apraxia: Loss of motor memory, cause: Lesion in Area 6, SMA 
20) Lateral corticospinal tract control distal limb muscle, while Medial corticospinal tract controls trunk, so 
during writing: There is coordination between the 2 tracts to help in writing 
21) Explain during rest, movement هتشر
حدور

Stretch reflex فيServoassistant Function 
و العادي  Stretch reflex ال

22) lesion in (Area 6, Lentiform nucleus, Paleo cerebellum, Medullary RF) 
23) Sudden withdrawal of Supraspinal facilitatory impulse (Gamma on AHC) 
24) Inhibitory on thalamus (Indirect pathway), loss of it's Inhibitory effect : Direct pathway due to 
Inhibitory effect of Caudate on GPI 
25) Explain Stretch reflex and Spinocerebellum 
26) Pontine RF  النظر
ي
27) Complex motor plan, Bimanual coordination 
28) Prefrontal association cortex م
ن
29) Inverse stretch reflex, importance: Protect muscle tendon (Not keeping muscle length constant) 
30) Flexor withdrawal reflex 
31) UMNL: Loss of control all over the reflex                                                                                                         
LMNL: Lesion of AHC or cut of efferent 
32) Parkinsonism: Slow monotonous speech                                                                                          
Neocerebellar syndrome: Stacatto speech 
33) Cause: Extra pyramidal tract is intact, so area 6 sends signals to Vestibulospinal tract to control 
proximal muscles 
34) Area 6 shares area 4 in fine movement, it shares by 30 % of pyramidal tract fibers 
35) Loss of damping (off) function of Spinocerebellum 
36) Deep nuclear cell of Cerebrocerebellum receives Excitatory signals from 2 sources: Both Climbing and 
Mossy fibers, while receives Inhibitory signal from one source: Purkinje fibers 
37) After discharge 
38) Inability to do rapid alternating movement due to lesion in Cerebrocerebellum 
39) Basal Ganglia lesion (Parkinsonism), Gait abnormality: Shuffling gait 
40) No, Dopamine doesn't cross BBB, we should give the patient L Dopa which will cross BBB and 
converted to Dopamine 
41) Types of Ataxia: 
A) Sensory: Tabes dorsalis 
B) Motor: Cerebellar disease 
C) Trunkal: Vestibulocerebellum lesion 

Question 1: Discuss the mechanism and properties of synaptic transmission. 
 Synaptic structure: - Synaptic knobs: terminal end of pre synaptic neuron contain: chemical vesicles, mitochondria, 
voltage gated Ca channels, protein molecules on inner surface (releasing factors) - Synaptic cleft: potential space between synaptic knob & synaptic gutter =30-50 nm  - Synaptic gutter: part of post synaptic membrane contain specific receptor, protein or enzymes for 
destruction of neurotransmitter, ligand gated Na channels, voltage gated channels 
 Mechanism: 
1. AP reach knob: opening voltage Ca channels ca influx →forming ca synaptotagmin complex           
poring, fusion and exocytosis  
2. Release of Chemical transmitter &cross cleft to post synaptic membrane 
3. Combine with specific receptor  
4. Change permeability for one or more ions: change RMP to become more or less negative  
5. Removal of transmitter by active reuptake, degradation or passive diffusion  
 Properties 
1. Forward direction (from pre to post synaptic ) 
2. Synaptic delay (0.5 msec)                                       potentiation 
3. Synaptic fatigue                          long term             Depression  
4. Synaptic plasticity                      short term             Enhancement 
                                                                                          Depression  
 
 
Question 2: List four properties of synaptic transmission & explain two of them. 
 
The properties of synaptic transmission: 
a. Forward Conduction (Unidirectional): 
From synaptic knobs to the postsynaptic neurons only. 
b. Synaptic Delay (0.5 m sec): 
It's the time between the arrival of the impulse to synaptic knob & the excitation of postsynaptic 
neuron. 
c. Fatigue of Synaptic Transmission: 
It's  rate of discharge in postsynaptic neurons due to rapid repetitive stimulation, caused by: 
a.  Chemical transmitter in presynaptic terminals.  
b. Down regulation of postsynaptic receptors. 
& its importance is to prevent over excitation in CNS 
d. Synaptic Potentiation (Plasticity):  
It's the ability to change the function of synapse according to demand. 
So, Synaptic transmission can be  or  
for short periods (Short term):  Potentiation & Inhibition 
Or long periods (Long term): Facilitation & Depression 
Physiology Questions and Answers  2017 
 
3 
 
 
 
Question3:Define synapse and describe its types 
Def: it is the site of junction between 2 neurons or a neuron and a cell or 2 cells. 
Types: 
Electrical Chemical - Gap junction - No delay - Bidirectional - Cardiac muscles and smooth muscle  - Non Sensitive to drugs - Always excitatory   - Chemical transmitters - Delay - Unidirectional - C.N.S 
It is divided into: 
 Axo-axonic 
 Axo-dentritic 
 Axo-somatic - Sensitive to drugs  - Excitatory or Inhibitory  
 
“If you stop learning, you stop creating history & become history" 
Physiology Questions and Answers  2017 
 
4 
 
Question4: Explain what is meant by postsynaptic inhibition, presynaptic inhibition, and 
lateral inhibition. Give an example for each. Define inhibitory post synaptic potential and 
explain its ionic bases. 
 Presynaptic inhibition: 
a) The inhibitory substance GABA ( in brain ) or encephalin (in spinal cord ) 
b) Large number of cl ions diffuse into terminal  
 -ve charge inhibit synaptic transmission because they cancek much of 
excitatory effect of +ve Na ions  
 Reduce ca entry so reduce release of excitatory neurotransmitter  
 Postsynaptic inhibition: 
a) using  inhibitory chemical transmitter such as Glycine ,GABA  
b) open cl channel mainly so : 
 passage of cl ions  
 more –ve charged from extracellular fluid to interior  
 hyper polarization -70 mv  
c) open k channels so : 
 +ve charge k ions to exterior  
 Interior become more –ve  
 State of hyperpolarization at rest called miniature inhibitory postsynaptic potential (M
IPSP) 
 Lateral inhibition: inhibition of nearby neuron >> Renshaw cells in AHCs release glycine to 
inhibit nearby alpha & inhibit alpha that stimulate it 
 IPSP: hyperpolarization of post synaptic membrane (more negative, less excitable) 
Ionic basis: opening of K & CL channels, closure of Na channels  
 
Question5:Mention the properties of the receptor potential. Describe the mechanism of 
adaptability receptors and differentiate between adaptation & fatigue. - Properties:  
a. Specificity (Muller’s law) 
b. Excitability (generator potential) 
c. Discharge impulse 
d. Compression function (Weber-Fechner law)  
e. Adaptation 
 Adaptation (decrease in response) Fatigue (decrease in response) 
Cause Constant sensation Previous repeated stimulus 
Mechanism 1. Gradual loss of stimulus in surrounding tissue 
2. Remodelling of receptor 
3. Decrease excitability of receptor 
 
 
Accumulation of waste product 
Physiology Questions and Answers  2017 
 
5 
 
 
 
Question 6: Define the generator potential (Receptor potential ) G.P , describe its ionic 
bases & its characteristic 
 
 Def. A state of partial depolarization of the receptor membrane occurring when the receptor is 
stimulated. 
 The ionic bases:  
1. The stimulus energy causes non-specific opening of Na+ channels (their number is directly 
proportionate to the stimulus intensity), this causes Na+ entry leading to partial depolarization. 
2. The G.P spreads passively with deceased intensity to adjacent parts of the sensory n. if 
unmyelinated & to 1st Ranvier node if myelinated 
3. If depolarization reaches threshold, A.P is generated without any effect on G.P 
N.B.  In Some receptors (e.g. photoreceptors), the electromagnetic waves cause closure of Na+ channels 
(hyperpolarization) 
 
 The characteristics: - Doesn't obey “all or none” law - Can be summated - Can initiate repeated A.P - Not blocked by local anesthetics - Longer than A.P (it's time from 5-10 msec. while A.P 2msec) - NO absolute refractory period - Can be graded (first amplitude increases rapidly then slowly to reach maximum) - Spreads passively - It's magnitude increases by increasing the stimulus intensity 
 
  
4. Decrease sensitivity of node of Ranvier 
5. Gradual inactivation of Na channels 
Effect of O2 
lack 
No effect Acceleration 
Effect of rate 
of stimulus 
No effect Acceleration 
Sites All tissue include receptor Some not receptor or nerve 
Onset & 
recovery 
Rapid Slow 
Excitability Not affected after adaptation After fatigue 
Physiology Questions and Answers  2017 
 
6 
 
Question7:state the general principles of coding sensory information in the nervous 
system? 
1. Modality of sensation  
a. Muller’s law: each receptor gives one type of sensation irrespective of the method of 
stimulation 
b. Labeled line principle: there is specific pathway for each sensation which transmits it to 
specific area in cortex. 
2. Locality “Law of projection" 
Each area in the body is represented in particular area in C.C so when impulse reaches this area 
the cortex project it to its original site. 
(Phantom limb phenomena) 
3. Intensity 
any change in stimulus intensity causes a change in 
a. Number of receptors  
b. Frequency of action potential 
 Weber Fechner law :The frequency of discharge from receptors is directly 
proportional to the logarithm of intensity of applied stimuli . 
c. state of cortical centers (stimulated or inhibited) 
Question8:classify the different sensations. Discuss briefly touch sensation. 
Sensations are classified into:  
1. Special sensations: vision - hearing - smell - taste  
2. Emotional sensations: fear - sadness.  
3. General sensations: 
a.  visceral sensations  
b. somatic sensations can be classified by 2 ways:  
i. According to site: - Cutaneous sensations : touch - temperature – pain - Deep sensations : proprioceptive sensations  - Mixed : vibration  
ii. According to type: - Pain sensation - Thermal sensation - mechanoreceptive sensation divided into: 
 Tactile sensations  
 Kinesthetic sensations  
Touch sensation: - Definition: it is the ability of the body to detect contact with objects. - Types : 
a. Crude touch  
Physiology Questions and Answers  2017 
 
7 
 
b. Fine touch : tactile localization & tactile discrimination 
c. very fine highly educated mixed sensations: Stereognosis & Texture of materials  
 
 Crude touch Fine touch 
Localization Not localized Localized 
Stimulus High Low 
Receptor F.N.E & hair end organ Meissner's corpuscle & Merckle's discs. 
Afferent Aδ, C Aβ 
Pathway Ventral spinothalamic tract & 
Dorsal column tract 
Dorsal column 
Perception Thalamus Cortex 
Examination By cotton wool test - tactile localization: 2 marker test - tactile discrimination: Weber's compass 
test 
 
 
Question9:Compare between the fast & slow pain and discuss the spinal & supraspinal 
pain control mechanisms. 
Question 10: Describe briefly types, pathway and center of perception of cutaneous pain. 
Explain pain analgesic system. 
 Fast pain Slow pain 
character Immediate, acute 
or sharp. 
Chronic, burning, aching 
or throbbing. 
Onset Within 0.1 sec. After 1 sec. 
duration Short Long 
receptors Mechanical & thermal receptors. All types of receptors. 
afferent Aδ C 
pathway Neospinothalamic tract Paleospinothalamic tract 
perception Cerebral cortex Reticular formation and  
non-specific thalamic nuclei 
neurotransmitter Glutamate Substance P 
localization localized Poorly localized 
summation   No summation  
Site Skin only Skin & deep tissues 
 
Analgesic (supraspinal) control system:  
1. Periventricular area of hypothalamus secretes endorphin that stimulates the periaqueductal 
grey area (PAGA). 
Physiology Questions and Answers  2017 
 
8 
 
2. PAGA secretes enkephalin that stimulates Raphe magnus nucleus. 
3. Raphe magnus nucleus secretes serotonin that stimulates the pain inhibitory complex (PIC) of 
the spinal cord.  
4. PIC secretes enkephalin which produces presynaptic inhibition of pain afferents.  
Gate theory (spinal control system): 
substantia gelatinosa of Rolando(SGR or spinal gate )in the spinal cord acts as a gate, through which pain 
impulses reach the lateral spinotahalmic tract, this gate can be blocked by: 
a. Impulses from : 
1. A fibers (stimulated by rubbing of skin). 
2. A fibers (stimulated by counter irritant & aquipuncture).  
3. Cortical fibers (during thinking).  
b. Opiods from : 
1. PIC in spinal cord.  
2. Circulating endorphins. 
 
“For true success ask yourself these four questions: Why? Why not? Why not me? 
Why not now? ” 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Physiology Questions and Answers  2017 
 
9 
 
 
Question 11: Give an account on pathway of deep sensation 
AB fibers medially ( centeral processes of dorsal root ganglion cells (pseudounipolar) 
whose peripheral processes carry sensations from deep receptors in muscles, tendons 
& joints. Runs upwards in the ipsilateral dorsal column and ascend to relay in Gracile & 
Cuneate of medulla  
(Gracile tract carries sensation from lower part of the body and lies medial in dorsal 
column , Cuneate tract carries sensation from upper part and lies lateral )  
Their central processes pass to the spinal cord through the dorsal root. 
N.B.  - They send collateral branches as they ascend that end on the dorsal horn of spinal cord 
which form the septo-marginal tract from gracile & comma-shaped tract from cuneate - Some cervical fibers end on the accessory cuneate nucleus (posterior to cuneate 
nucleus), its axons (cuneo-cerebellar fibers) pass to the cerebellum. 
1st Neuron 
Gracile & Cuneate nuclei of the medulla oblongata  
Axons of these nuclei cross the median forming the internal arcuate fibers (sensory 
decussation)  
Fibers ascend in the brain stem as the medial lemniscus to reach the thalamus. 
2nd 
Neuron 
VPLN Ventral PosteroLateral Nucleus of the thalamus 
Axons of these cells pass through posterior limb of internal capsule, then through 
corona radiata to reach sensory area of cerebral cortex. 
3rd 
Neuron 
 
Question 12: State & explain modulation of pain sensation 
Question 13: Describe the role of brain and spinal cord analgesic system in pain control  
Pain transmission& perception are subjected to modification or inhibition along its pathway and in the 
brain by 3 systems: 
 
 The most important gates are ( SGR _ Thalamus _ Reticular formation )  
Inhibition of pain transmission by simultaneous tactile sensory signals by large 
Aβfibers from peripheral tactile receptors ( local lateral inhibition in spinal cord 
)  
1. At SGR (spinal gate):blocked by 
 collateralsAβfibers 
 descending fibers through presynaptic inhibition (GABA _Enkephalin )  
 Aδfibers (counterirritsnt or acupuncture ) by spinal pathway and 
psychogenic excitation of centeral analgesia system  
2. Thalamus & reticular formation: blocked by descending (corticofugal) fibers 
from higher centers  
3. Stress analgesia :  
 Impulses from cerebral cortex ,hypothalamus to PIC  
Gate theory 
for pain 
Physiology Questions and Answers  2017 
 
10 
 
 B _endorphin from anterior pituitary to opiate receptors  
In stress conditions, impulses discharged from cerebral cortex (specially limbic 
association areas) & hypothalamus excite supraspinal pathway of inhibition 
secreting β endorphin stimulating opiate receptors in periaquiductal grey area 
(PAGA) &substantia nigra via dopaminergic fibers to stimulate raphe magnus 
nucleus & related nuclei, they send serotonergic fibers to PIC, interneurons release 
enkephalins causes presynaptic inhibition by blocking Ca channels 
Neurotransmitters: enkephalin, serotonin, dynorphins 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
                                        Raphe magnus N                                       RF 
 
 
 
 
 
                                             Dorsolateral column to PIC on dorsal horn  
 
 
                             Pre &post synaptic inhibition of incoming C and Aδ fibers  
 
Analgesia 
system 
Cerebral cortex (limbic system 
)&hypothalamus  
B-endorphin  
Opioid receptors in PAG 
Enkephalin  
seretonin 
Enkephalin  
Physiology Questions and Answers  2017 
 
11 
 
 
Receptors: delta, Kappa, sigma, epsilon & Mu  - Produced by dorsal root ganglion  - Stimulated exogenously by morphin , endogenously by opoid peptides  
Sites:  
1. periventricular area of diencephalon  
2. periaquiductal grey area (in the mid brain) 
3. Substantia nigra (in the midbrain) 
4. Midline raphe nuclei in brain stem (raphe magnus) nucleus in the lower pons 
& upper medulla oblongata 
 
 
 
Opioid peptides: Morphine-like substances 
1. Enkephalins (met & leu ): are present in all parts of analgesic system, adrenal 
medulla & GIT .degraded by enkephalinase  
2. Endorphins: is more stronger present mainly in hypothalamus & hypophysis 
3. Dynorphins:is stronger than enkephalin .present in minute amounts in CNS 
,POST. Pituitary and duodenum . 
Brain opiate 
system 
 
by opiates & drugs inhibit production of prostaglandins Medical 
Physiology Questions and Answers  2017 
 
12 
 
Other methods for control of pain: 
 
Question 14: Describe referred pain and give 2 examples. Explain the theories of 
referred pain. 
Question 15:Define referred pain and explain its mechanisms. - It is the pain felt away from its original site. It is most frequent in visceral pain and deep somatic 
pain . The pain in one of the visceral organs& referred to an area on the body surface.  - Examples: 
a. Cardiac pain: is referred to the back of the neck, left shoulder & left arm.  
b. Renal pain: is felt as a back pain that radiates to the inguinal region & testicles. 
c. Gastric pain: is felt between umbilicus & xiphoid process.  
d. Gall bladder pain: is referred to epigastrium & tip of the right scapula. 
e. Appendicular pain: is felt around the umbilicus.  
f. Teeth pain: is referred to other teeth. E.g. upper teeth is referred to lower.  - Theories of referred pain: 
1. Convergence projection theory: 
Afferent pain fibers from the diseased viscera converge on the same cells in SGR which receives pain 
impulses from a particular skin area supplied by the same dorsal nerve roots.  
The cells of SGR discharge the impulses along the lateral spinothalamic tract to the sensory area on the 
cortex which is accustomed to receive pain sensation from the skin,  therefore pain impulses from the 
viscera is projected to the skin area. 
2. Facilitation theory: (Subliminal fringe) 
The incoming impulses from the visceral structures lower the threshold of the spinothalamic neurons 
receiving afferent from somatic areas,  so that minor activity in the pain pathway from the somatic 
areas which would normally die out in the spinal cord will pass on to the brain. 
 
Question 16: Compare between somatic and visceral pain. 
 Cutaneous Deep Visceral 
Def Pain from skin Pain from deep structure Pain from visceral 
Causes 1. Injury of skin IIIR, SPASM IIIR, ischemia, over distention 
1. Anterolateral cordotomy / cutting spinothalamic tract 
2. Lanimectomy: cutting posterior root in severe pain 
3. Prefrontal to bectomy relieves distress, no bother 
Surgical 
1. electric stimulation of large sensory fibers in spinal cord or selected area of skin 
2. electric stimulation of analgesia system i.e. periaqueductal & paraventricular 
areas 
Electrical 
Physiology Questions and Answers  2017 
 
13 
 
2. Inflammation 
3. Irritation 
4. Referred pain 
Characters - Fast - Slow 
Slow, depressor, 
autonomic effect 
Slow, depressor, autonomic effect, 
referred pain, rigidity overlying ms 
 
Question 17:List the function of the cortical sensory areas. 
Question 18: Discuss the characters and functions of primary somatic sensory area (I). 
Describe the effects of its lesion. 
 Site : post central gyrus  
 Characters: 
1. It receive all sensations from opposite side of the body 