b. Ipsilateral motor paralysis of upper motor neuron type. 
c. Ipsilateral loss of crude touch. 
d. Ipsilateral motor paralysis of lower motor neuron type. 
e. Contralateral motor paralysis of upper motor neuron type. 

97. A patient suffered UMNL paralysis in the left lower limb with loss of 
vibration sense in the same limb and loss of pain sensation in the 
right lower limb; the most-likely lesion is: 
a. Poliomyelitis. 
b. Complete transaction of the spinal cord below TI. 
c. Dorsal root lesion (Tabes dorsalis). 
d. Left 7 hemisection of the spinal cord. 
e. Right 7 hemisection of the spinal cord. 

98. Syringomyelia first affects: 
a. Vibration sense. 
b. Pain and temperature on both sides of the body. 
c. Pain and temperature on one side of the body. 
d. Touch sensation. 
e. Motor activity. 

99. Upper motor neuron lesion is characterized by: 
a. Hypotonia. 
b. Paralysis of muscle & all types of movement. 
c. Lost tendon jerks. 
d. +ve Babiniski sign. e. Disuse atrophy of muscles. 

30 

_— Ee A; ;...-- 
SeperERT TENE # all aAil See 



100. Lower motor neuron lesion is characterized by: 
a. Spasticity. 
b. Paralysis of voluntary movements only. 
c. Lost tendon jerks. 
d. +ve Babiniski sign. 
e. Normal response to electric stimuli. 

101-105. For each statement in the right column, choose the appropriate 
artery in the right column: 

101. Form most blood supply to lumbar segments a. Anterior spinal artery. 
of spinal cord. b. Posterior spinal artery. 

102. Supply lateral horn of spinal cord. c. Radicular arteries. 
103. May arise from posterior inferior d. Anterior & posterior 

cerebellar artery. spinal arteries. 
104. Descend in the form of 4 longitudinal arteries. 
105. Form the main supply of the cervical part of the spinal cord. 

106. A patient who has a right hemisection of spinal cord at the level of 
T6 will suffer from all the following EXCEPT: 
a. Paralysis of muscles of 6™ right intercostal space. 
b. Loss of proprioception of right lower limb. 
c. Loss of fine touch in right upper limb. 
d. Loss of pain & temperature in left lower limb. 
e. Paralysis of right lower limb. 

Answers of MCQs 

Remarks 

1 | b | Spinal dura & arachnoid end at level of S2. 
2 e | Since T12 segment lies at level of T9 vertebra (-3), therefore L1 

segment lies at level of T10 vertebra. 
3 | a |Inadults, spinal cord ends at level of L1 vertebra or at level of 

intervertebral disc between L1-L2 vertebrae. 
4 | d | A tumor at T4 vertebra compresses T6 segment of spinal cord. 
5 | d |Ligamentum denticulatum is not present in sacral canal because its 

last tooth lies at level of L1 (end of spinal cord). 
* Sacral canal contains: 1. Filum terminale which continues till 2" 
coccygeal piece. 2. Cauda equina formed by sacral & coccygeal 
spinal nerve roots. 3. CSF in which cauda equina spinal nerves are 
bathed. 4. Dura & arachnoid matter which end at level of S2. 

31 



Spinal dura & arachnoid end at level of S2. 
i 

Leptomeninges include pia matter + arachnoid matter. 
Dura matter ends at level of S2. 

Spinal cord is anchored to dura matter by denticulate ligaments. 
In adults, spinal cord ends at level of lower border of L1. 

At birth, spinal cord ends at level of L3. 

In lumbar puncture, the needle is inserted just above or below tip 
of L4 spine. 

13 At birth, the conus medullaris (which is the lowermost part of the 
spinal cord) ends at the level of L3. 

ef 

14 A disc prolapsed between T5 & T6 will exert pressure on the 
intervertebral foramen between T5 & T6 which gives passage to 
T5 spinal nerve since each thoracic spinal nerve exits the 
vertebral column below its corresponding vertebra. 

15 Filum terminal begins at lower border of L1 as continuation of pia. 
16 Cervical spinal nerves (C1-C7) exit above corresponding vertebrae. 

Thoracic & lumbar nerves exit below corresponding vertebrae. 
17 Since the 8 cervical segments end at C7 vertebra. This means that 

T1 segment begins at T1 vertebra. Since we say that at T12 
segment subtract -3, this means that T12 segment lies at level of 
T9 vertebra. So, all the thoracic segments occupy 9 thoracic vert. 

18 Dorsal root of spinal nerve = purely sensory. 
Ventral root of spinal nerve = purely motor. 
Spinal nerve trunk + ventral ramus + dorsal ramus = mixed. 

19 14 segments. The 8 cervical segments lie within the cervical 
vertebrae. The upper 6 thoracic segments lie within the upper 4 
thoracic vertebrae (At T6 segment = subtract -2 = T4 vertebra. 
Therefore: total number of segments above lower border of T4 = 
8 cervical segments + upper 6 thoracic segments = 14 segments. 

20 Cells of spinal (dorsal root) ganglion are pseudounipolar. 
(a) is wrong because autonomic fibers run in anterior root. 
(b) is wrong because the dorsal root has a dorsal root ganglion. 
(c) is wrong because dendrites pf posterior root pass peripherally. 
(d) is wrong because autonomic fibers arise from lateral horn. 

21 The cervical vertebrae contain the 8 cervical segments & the 
upper 9 thoracic vertebrae contain all the 12 thoracic segments. 
So above lower border of T9, ther is 8 cervical segments + 12 
thoracic segments = 20 segments. 

32 

| | 
oO 0 Oo aloo a | 

| 
r- 



22 Intermediolateral group of neurons lie in lateral horn. 

23 Dorsal root fibers give ascending fibers which form long tracts. 
(a) is wrong because ells of dorsal root ganglion are unipolar. 
(b) is wrong because peripheral processes (dendrites) of dorsal 
root fifers are connected to receptors. 
(d) is wrong because dorsal root fibers give long ascending fibers. 
(e) is wrong because after entering spinal cord, dorsal root fibers 
give long fibers which form long ascending tracts. 

24 The nerve fibers within gray matter are mostly non-myelinated. 
25 Reticular nucleus lies lateral to nucleus proprius. 
26 Its anteromedial nucleus extends in all levels of spinal cord. 

(a) is wrong because its alpha neurons supply extrafusal ms. fibers. 
(c) is wrong because its medial nuclear group supply muscles of 
neck & back (muscles attached to axial skeleton). 
(d) is wrong because its gamma neurons supply intrafusal muscle 
fibers of muscle spindles. 
(e) is wrong because the retroposterolateral column of nuclei 
supplies muscles of hands & feet. 

27 Laminae ITI & IV correspond to main sensory nucleus. 
Lamina V - corresponds to reticular nucleus. 

28 Fibers in dorsal column tract are arranged from medial to lateral: 
sacral, lutabar, thoracic & cervical. 

29 Crude touch is carried by ventral spinothalamic tract. 
30 Spinal nucleus of Trigeminal nerve. 
31 Stereognosis of hand is carried by Cuneate tract (responsible for 

proprioception & stereognosis from upper 7 of body = above T6). 
32 Fibers in spinothalamic tract are arranged from lateral to medial: 

sacral, lumbar, thoracic & cervical. 

33 It Conveys proprioceptive sensation. 
(b) is wrong because it starts from sacral region. 
(c) is wrong because its sacral fibers are most medial. 
(d) is wrong because it does not pass through posterior horn of 
spinal cord 
(e) is wrong because it terminates in nucleus ventral posterior 
lateral nucleus of thalamus (VPMN). 

34 Starts in the midthoracic region (76). 
(a) is wrong because it does not Carry crude touch. It carries 
proprioception & fine touch. 

33 



(c) is wrong because its main 2"d neuron is the cuneate nucleus. 
(d) is wrong because its 3" neuron passes in the posterior limb of 
the internal capsule. 
(e) is wrong because its 3" neuron terminates in the postcentral 
gyrus (main sensory area). 

35 | b | Right medial lemniscus carries conscious proprioception from left 
side of body. The medial lemniscus is a part of 2" neuron carrying 
proprioception. It is formed by the neurons of gracile & Cuneate 
nuclei that already crossed in sensory Decussation in medulla. 

36 | d | Right gracile tract carries conscious proprioception of right LL. 

37 | b | Unconscious proprioception is carried by spinocerebellar tracts 
38 | d | Lateral spinothalamic tract carries pain & temperature sensations. 
39 | a | Right spinal lemniscus carries Pain and temperature sensations 

from left side of body. 
40 | c | Muscle tone is a non-conscious proprioceptive sensation that 

reaches the cerebellum & not sensory cortex. 
41 | b | Fibers of ventral spinothalamic tract decussate in spinal cord. 
42 | d | Sense of movement and sense of position are lost after lesion of: 

gracile and cuneate tracts. 
43 | b | Cuneate tract carries fine touch from upper limb. 

44 | d | Left spinal lemniscus carries crude touch from right side of body. 
45 | e | The medial most fibers of the gracile tract are sacral fibers. 
46 | c | Sensation of position of limbs is a part of the dorsal column tracts 

which do not synapse in spinal cord but synapse in gracile & 
cuneate nuclei in medulla. Pain, temperature & crude touch 
sensations synapse in spinal cord. 

47 | b | A lesion in the right gracile tract leads to loss of vibration sense 
of right tibia. The gracile tract carries sensations from lower limb 
of same side. 

48 | a | Trigeminal ganglion. 

49 | b | The right medial lemniscus carries sensations of conscious 
proprioception from the left side of the body. 

50 | e | Spinal lemniscus terminates in VPLN of thalamus. 
51 | c¢ | Lateral spinothalamic tract is 2"¢ neuron for pain pathway from 

lower limb. 
52 | e | Cuneo-cerebellar tract begins from accessory cuneate nucleus. 
53 | d | Ventral spinothalamic tract is 2" neuron for crude touch from 

thumb. 

34 



VPMN of thalamus forms 379 neuron for pain pathway from head 
(including eye). 

55 Spinotectal tract is responsible for head turning in response to 
pain sensation. 

56 Cuneate tract carries conscious proprioception from thumb (from 
upper 3 of body above T6). 

o7 Cuneo-cerebellar tract carries unconscious proprioception from 
cervical segments (C1-C7). 

58 Spino-olivary tract carries unconscious proprioception to 
cerebellum, 

59 Gracile tract carries fine touch of big toe (from lower 7 of body 
below T6). 
Lateral spinothalamic tract carries pain felt in knee. 

61 Fibers of its 3™ neuron pass through posterior limb cf internal 
capsule. 
(a) is wrong because its 15t neuron does not terminate in spinal 
cord. It ascend through all spinal cord without relay & its 1%" relay 
is in medulla oblongata. 
(b) is wrong because its 2" neuron form internal arcuate fibers 
(sensory radiation). 
(c) Its fibers ascend in brain stem within medial lemniscus. 
(d) is wrong because VPLN of thalamus forms its 37 neuron. 

62 Sacral fibers are the most medial fibers in the spinal cord during 
its ascend through Gracile tract. 
* In Lateral & Ventral spinothalamic tracts, the sacral fibers are 
the most lateral. 
* Cuneate tract does not contain sacral fibers because it begins at 
T6 & so it contains thoracic & cervical fibers only. 
* Trigeminal lemniscus has no relation to spinal cord since it begins 
in brain stem. 

63 Facial nucleus that supplies muscles of lower 3 of face receives 
corticonuclear fibers of contralateral (opposite) side only. 

64 Lower 7 of facial nucleus & the part of hypoglossal nucleus that 
supplies the genioglossus muscle receive only contralateral 
corticonuclear fibers. 

65 The crosses corticospinal tract occupies the lateral column of 
spinal cord as lateral corticospinal tract. 
(a) & (c) Pyramidal tract passes through posterior limb of internal 
capsule & Pyramid before crossing in lowermost part of medulla. 
(d) is wrong bec. it passes through middle 3/5 of basis Pedunculi. 

35 



mm 

'(e) is wrong because it is dispersed into separate bundles in basis 
| ponfis. 

66 Most of fibers of lateral corticospinal tract arise from precentral 
gyrus. 
(b) is wrong because it is present in lateral funiculus. 
(c) is wrong because it passes in posterior limb of internal capsule. 
(d) is wrong because it decussates in lower medulla. 

 (e) is wrong because its injury produces upper motor neuron lesion. 
67 In brain stem, the most medial fibers of the lateral corticospinal 

tract are the Cervical fibers. 
68 Corticospinal fibers are broken into bundles in basis pontis. 
69 Motor Decussation occurs in caudal part of medulla. 
70 | Pyramidal tract descends in the form of bundles in basis pontis. 

71 | Pyramidal tract descends as scattered bundles in basis pontis. 
' (a) is wrong because it arises from motor area 4 & premotor area 6. 
 (b) is wrong because it passes through post. limb of int. capsule. 
'(¢) is wrong because it descends within the middle 3/5 of basis 
' pedunculi. 
(e) is wrong because its crossed fibers in medulla form lateral 
corticospinal tract. 

72 | It ends on contralateral & ipsilateral cranial nerve nuclei (with 2 
exceptions). 
* Since the orbicularis oris muscle lies in the lower 3 of face, so 

the part of facial nucleus that controls right half of orbicularis 
oris muscle (right lower quadrant of face) receives left 
corticonuclear tract. It receives no ipsilateral corticonuclear T. 
* The left genioglossus muscle is controlled by right corticonuclear 
tract. It receives no ipsilateral corticonuclear fibers. 

7/3 Rubrospinal tract is facilitatory to muscle tone of flexor 
muscle group. 

74 Vestibulospinal tract is extensor to antigravity muscles & does 
not extend beyond mid-thoracic region. 

75 Medullary reticulospinal tract is inhibitory to antigravity muscles. 
76 Pontine reticulospinal tract is extensor to antigravity muscles 

& descends within the whole length of the spinal cord. 
Tectospinal tract is responsible for turning oh head & neck in 
response to auditory & visual stimuli. 

36 

oWo I©  J I =~ I I = 
— 



The lumbar region of the spinal cord has the richest blood supply. 

Anterior spinal artery occlusion leads to bilateral damage of 
lateral column of spinal cord (which contains lateral corticospinal 
tract which is UMN of muscles of lower limb + lateral 
spinothalamic tract which carries pain sensation). Proprioception is 
not affected because it is carried by dorsal column tract (which is 
not supplied by anterior spinal artery). 

80 Hemisection in the cervical spinal cord may cause contralateral 
pain sensory loss in the trunk and lower limb. 
(a) is wrong because it causes ipsilateral loss of proprioception 
from the lower limb. 
(b) is wrong because it causes ipsilateral flaccid weakness in the 
upper limb (since upper limb is supplied by cervical region & at level 
of lesion muscles suffer of LMNL which is characterized by 
flaccid weakness). 
(c) is wrong because it causes ipsilateral spastic weakness in the 
lower limb (since lower limb is supplied by lumbar region & below 
level of lesion muscles suffer of UMNL which is characterized by 
spastic weakness). 
(e) is wrong because it causes contralateral temperature sensory 
loss in the lower limb. 

81 Lesion in the right gracile tract leads to ipsilateral loss of 
proprioception & fine touch below Té6 (including vibration sense of 
right tibia). 
* Upper limb is not affected because its proprioception & fine 
touch is carried by cuneate tract. 
* Any other sensation (such as touch) & contralateral sensation (in 
left side) is not affected. 

82 Posterior spinal artery gives NO radicular arteries. 
83 The posterior spinal artery arises from vertebral or posterior 

inferior cerebellar artery. 
(a) is wrong because it is in the form of 4 longitudinal arteries. 
(b) is wrong because it descents both infront & behind the 
attachment of dorsal roots. 
(c) is wrong because the base of posterior horn is supplied by 
anterior spinal artery. 
(e) is wrong because it gives NO radicular arteries. 

84 All are correct. 

85 All are correct. 

37 



86 | b | Complete section of spinal cord above C5 results in death (due to 
paralysis of diaphragm & intercostal muscles). 

87 b | Gracile and cuneate tracts are supplied by Posterior spinal artery. 
88 | b | Complete section of spinal cord at level of C6 results in 

quadriplegia. At C6, the origin of phrenic nerve is spared & so the 
diaphragm is intact. However the cervical segments (which supply 
upper limb through brachial plexus) & lumbar & sacral segments 
(which supply lower limb through lumbar & sacral plexuses) are 

= affected causing quadriplegia. el 
89 | e | Hemisection of spinal cord gives below the level of lesion > 

ipsilateral proprioception loss & Upper motor neuron lesion but 
contralateral loss of pain and temperature. 

90 | d | In Brown Sequard Syndrome, there is ipsilateral LMN lesion at 
same level of lesion. 

91 | d | UMN lesion is characterized by absent superficial reflexes (such 
as cremasteric and abdominal reflexes). 

92 | d | LMN lesion is characterized by marked muscle wasting. 
93 | b | Syringomyelia first affects pain and temperature on both sides of 

the body. 
94 | a | Syringomyelia affects selectively cervical & upper thoracic 

segments of spinal cord. 
95 | a | A pyramidal tract lesion in the left 3 of the midbrain leads to 

right sided hemiplegia (UMNL type) since it affects the pyramidal 
tract before crossing in lower part of medulla. 

96 | b | Hemisection of the spinal cord would result below the 
level of the lesion an ipsilateral motor paralysis of upper motor 
neuron Type. 

97 | d | Left 3 hemisection of the spinal cord causes ipsilateral UMNL 
paralysis with loss of vibration sense & contralateral loss of pain 
sensation. 

98 | b | Syringomyelia first affects pain & temp. on both sides of body. 
99 | d | UMN lesion is characterized by +ve Babiniski sign. 
100 | ¢ | LMN lesion is characterized by lost tendon jerks. 

101 | ¢ | Radicular arteries form most blood supply to lumbar segments 
102 | a | Anterior spinal artery supply lateral horn of spinal cord. 
103 | b | Posterior spinal artery may arise from posterior inferior 
om cerebellar artery. 
104 | b | Posterior spinal artery descend in the form of 4 longitudinal As. 

38 



A eS EE ——— 

105 | d | Anterior & posterior spinal arteries form the main supply of the 
cervical part of the spinal cord. 

le m—— 

106 | ¢ | Since the lesion is at level of T6, so the upper limbs are not 
affected since the nerve supply of them arise above the level of 
the lesion. 

Essay Questions 

1. Describe shape of spinal cord. 
2. Describe the site of exit of spinal nerves from vertebral column. 
3. Mention the site of termination of spinal cord meninges. 
4. Give an idea about lumbar puncture. 

5. Enumerate nuclei of posterior horn of spinal cord. 
6. Enumerate nuclei of anterior horn of spinal cord. 
7. Describe nuclei of lateral horn of spinal cord. 

8. Describe pathway of pain from face. 
9. Enumerate the neurons that form pathway of pain from body. 
10. Enumerate the neurons that form pathway of crude touch from body. 
11. Enumerate the neurons that form pathway of conscious proprioception & fine 
touch from body. 
12. Enumerate the tracts that carry conscious & unconscious proprioception. 
13. Describe how unconscious proprioception is carried to cerebellum. 
14. Give an account on pathway of pain from the face and body. 
15. Name the tract (s) carrying touch sensations of the face. 

16. Describe lamination of pyramidal tract in cerebral cortex, internal capsule, 
brain stem & spinal cord. 
17. Describe termination of pyramidal tract. 
18. Describe corticonuclear (corticobulbar) tract. 
19. Describe tectospinal tract. 
20. Describe rubrospinal tract. 

21. Give an account on blood supply (cervical part) of the spinal cord. 
22. Mention the origin of anterior spinal artery & the parts supplied by it. 
23. Mention the origin of posterior spinal artery & the parts supplied by it. 
24. Enumerate the arteries that give radicular arteries to spinal cord. 

25. Give an account on differences between upper & lower motor neuron lesions. 
26. Give an account on two main tracts af fected by hemisection of spinal cord. 

39



27. Describe the effect of complete transection of spinal cord. 
28. Describe the clinical picture of a patient with Brown Sequard syndrome. 

29. Describe the effect of anterior spinal artery occlusion. 
30. Describe sensory loss in case of syringomyelia. 

Cases 

1. A teenager girl discovered loss of sensation of her right hand and on 
examination, the doctor discovered loss of pain and temperature of 
distal part of the upper limb. Also, there was diminished pain and 
temperature on left hand. The condition was diagnosed as cavitations 
of the spinal cord. 
a. What is your diagnosis? 
b. Why the pain and temperature fibers are only involved in this case? 
c. Where is the most common site for such condition? 

2. A 25 year old patient had an operation under spinal anesthesia. During 
recovery, he could not feel the back of his lower limb with difficulty 
in climbing the stairs by the right foot. 
a. Where is the correct site for doing a lumbar puncture? 
b. Where does the spinal cord normally end in such a patient? 
c. What is the level of termination of the spinal meninges? 

3. An old man developed UMNL paralysis of muscles of lower part of the 
face while muscles of upper part of face were preserved. 
a. Explain why the muscles of upper part are preserved? 
b. List the parasympathetic nuclei of the facial nerve? 
¢. Enumerate the terminal branches of the facial nerve 

Answers of Cases 

* Answers of Case 1: 

a. Syringomyelia. 

b. Because the closest fibers to the central canal & these cavitations are the 
crossing fibers carrying pain & temperature. 
c. Cervical & upper thoracic segments of spinal cord. 

40 

on LEE lri RL yw CF JI VEE TEEN Toes 



* Answers of Case 2: 

a. just above or below L4 spine. 
b. Lower border of L1. 
c. Dura & arachnoid mater - end at S2, while Pia mater > ends at L1. 

* Answers of Case 3: 

a. Because the upper part of the facial nucleus that controls the muscles of the 

upper 3 of the face receives fibers from the corticonuclear tract of both sides 
(bilaterally represented). 
b. Superior salivary nucleus + special lacrimatory nucleus + uncertain nucleus. 
c. Temporal, zygomatic, buccal, mandibular & cervical. 

41


