Part 1 

General organization of CNS 

Multiple Choice Questions (MCQs) 

1. Choose the INCORRECT matching: 
a. Diencephalon - 37 ventricle. 
b. Midbrain - cerebral aqueduct of Sylvius. 
c. Cerebral hemisphere - lateral ventricle. 
d. Hind brain - 4™ ventricle. 
e. Mesencephalon - 2"d ventricle. 

2. Choose the CORRECT statement: 
a. In spinal cord, white matter is H-shaped. 
b. In brain stem, white matter surrounds grey matter. 
c. Cerebral hemispheres contain deep nuclei formed of grey matter. 
d. In cerebellum, white matter forms the outer cortex. 
e. In spinal cord, grey matter surrounds white matter. 

3-7. For each term in the left column, choose the appropriate description 
in the right column: 
3. Ganglion. a. A collection of cell bodies within CNS. 
4. Tract. b. A Bundle of nerve fibers outside CNS. 
5. Nucleus. c. A collection of ascending fibers within 

brain stem. 
6. Lemniscus. d. A collection of cell bodies outside CNS. 
7. Nerve. e. A bundle of nerve fibers within CNS. 

8. The nucleus is: 
a. A group of cell bodies within peripheral nervous system. 
b. A group of cell bodies within central nervous system. 
c. A group of nerve fibers within peripheral nervous system. 
d. A group of nerve fibers within central nervous system. 
e. A collection of nerve fibers in brain stem. 

9. Choose the CORRECT matching: 
a. Ganglion - a group of cell bodies within CNS. 
b. Pathway - a chain of successive tracts having different functions. 
c. Lemniscus - a collection of descending fibers within the brain stem. 
d. Afferent - an output going away from a certain structure. 
e. Tract - a bundle of nerve fibers within CNS. 

1



10. A chain of successive tracts in CNS having the function is called: 
a. Fasciculus b. Pathway 
c. Lemniscus d. Commissure 
e. Decussation 

11. A bundle of nerve fibers in the CNS having the same beginning, 
termination and function is called: 
a. Pathway b. Tract 
¢. Lemniscus d. Commissure 
e. Decussation 

Answers of MCQs 

Remarks 

Mesencephalon = midbrain. Its cavity is cerebral aqueduct. 
Cerebral hemispheres contain deep nuclei formed of grey M. 
(a) is wrong because in spinal cord, grey matter is H-shaped. 
(b) is wrong because in brain stem, grey matter form deep nuclei. 
(d) is wrong because in cerebellum, grey matter forms outer cortex. 
(e) is wrong because in spinal cord, white matter surrounds grey 

matter. 

Ganglion = A collection of cell bodies outside CNS. 

Tract = A bundle of nerve fibers within CNS. 

Nucleus = A collection of cell bodies within CNS. 

Lemniscus = A collection of ascending fibers within brainstem. 

Nerve = A Bundle of nerve fibers outside CNS. 

The nucleus is a group of cell bodies within PNS. 
The tract = a bundle of nerve fibers within CNS. 
(a) is wrong because Ganglion = group of cell bodies within PNS. 
(b) is wrong because Pathway = a chain of successive tracts having 
same functions. 
(c) is wrong because Lemniscus = a collection of ascending fibers 
within the brain stem. 
(d) is wrong because Afferent - an input going towards a certain 
structure. 

10 Pathway = a chain of successive tracts in CNS having same functions. 
11 Tract = A bundle of nerve fibers in the CNS having the same 

beginning, termination and function. 

2 

VIOONO Nbb W  

© OOO O00 0 QA 


